rather for the failure of objectivity when he deals with the 
revolution and the ensuing repression. 

Among historians of the Spanish Civil War, the dominant 
view is that the Communist policy was in essentials the correct 
one—that in order to consolidate domestic and international 
support for the Republic it was necessary to block and then 
reverse the social revolution. Jackson, for example, states that 
Caballero “realized that it was absolutely necessary to rebuild 
the authority of the Republican state and to work in close co¬ 
operation with the middle-class liberals.” The anarchist leaders 
who entered the government shared this view, putting their 
trust in the good faith of liberals such as Companys and believ¬ 
ing—naively, as events were to show—that the Western democ¬ 
racies would come to their aid. 

A policy diametrically opposed to this was advocated by 
Camillo Berneri. In his open letter to the anarchist minister 
Federica Montseny 109 he summarizes his views in the follow¬ 
ing way: “The dilemma, war or revolution, no longer has mean¬ 
ing. The only dilemma is this: either victory over Franco 
through revolutionary war , or defeat” (his italics). He argued 
that Morocco should be granted independence and that an at¬ 
tempt should be made to stir up rebellion throughout North 
Africa. Thus a revolutionary struggle should be undertaken 
against Western capitalism in North Africa and, simultaneously, 
against the bourgeois regime in Spain, which was gradually 
dismantling the accomplishments of the July revolution. The 
primary front should be political. Franco relied heavily on 
Moorish contingents, including a substantial number from 
French Morocco. The Republic might exploit this fact, de¬ 
moralizing the Nationalist forces and perhaps even winning 
them to the revolutionary cause by political agitation based on 


109 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


the concrete alternative of pan-Islamic—specifically, Moroc¬ 
can—revolution. Writing in April 1937, Berneri urged that the 
army of the Republic be reorganized for the defense of the 
revolution, so that it might recover the spirit of popular partici¬ 
pation of the early days of the revolution. He quotes the words 
of his compatriot Louis Bertoni, writing from the Huesca front: 

The Spanish war, deprived of all new faith, of any idea of a social 
transformation, of all revolutionary grandeur, of any universal 
meaning, is now merely a national war of independence that must 
be carried on to avoid the extermination that the international 
plutocracy demands. There remains a terrible question of life or 
death, but no longer a war to build a new society and a new 
humanity. 

In such a war, the human element that might bring victory over 
fascism is lost. 

In retrospect, Berneri’s ideas seem quite reasonable. Delega¬ 
tions of Moroccan nationalists did in fact approach the Va¬ 
lencia government asking for arms and materiel, but were 
refused by Caballero, who actually proposed territorial conces¬ 
sions in North Africa to France and England to try to win their 
support. Commenting on these facts, Broue and Temime ob¬ 
serve that these policies deprived the Republic of “the instru¬ 
ment of revolutionary defeatism in the enemy army,” and even 
of a possible weapon against Italian intervention. Jackson, on 
the other hand, dismisses Berneri’s suggestion with the remark 
that independence for Morocco (as for that matter, even aid to 
the Moroccan nationalists) was “a gesture that would have 
been highly appreciated in Paris and London.” Of course it is 
correct that France and Britain would hardly have appreciated 
this development. As Berneri points out, “it goes without saying 
that one cannot simultaneously guarantee French and British 
interests in Morocco and carry out an insurrection.” But Jack- 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


son’s comment does not touch on the central issue, namely, 
whether the Spanish revolution could have been preserved, 
both from the fascists at the front and from the bourgeois- 
Communist coalition within the Republic, by a revolutionary 
war of the sort that the left proposed—or, for that matter, 
whether the Republic might not have been saved by a political 
struggle that involved Franco’s invading Moorish troops, or at 
least eroded their morale. It is easy to see why Caballero was 
not attracted by this bold scheme, given his reliance on the 
eventual backing of the Western democracies. On the basis of 
what we know today, however, Jackson’s summary dismissal of 
revolutionary war is much too abrupt. 

Furthermore, Bertoni’s observations from the Huesca front 
are borne out by much other evidence, some of it cited earlier. 
Even those who accepted the Communist strategy of discipline 
and central control as necessary concede that the repressions 
that formed an ineliminable part of this strategy “tended to 
break the fighting spirit of the people .” 110 One can only specu¬ 
