specific vigilance, not just the elaboration of general principles, 
is required from the intellectual community toward specific 
growing dangers to its integrity.” 

Senator Fulbright has developed a similar theme in an im¬ 
portant and perceptive speech. 2 He describes the failure of the 
universities to form “an effective counterweight to the military- 
industrial complex by strengthening their emphasis on the tradi¬ 
tional values of our democracy.” Instead they have “joined the 
monolith, adding greatly to its power and influence.” Specifi¬ 
cally, he refers to the failure of the social scientists, “who ought 
to be acting as responsible and independent critics of the Gov¬ 
ernment’s policies,” but who instead become the agents of these 
policies. “While young dissenters plead for resurrection of the 
American promise, their elders continue to subvert it.” With 
“the surrender of independence, the neglect of teaching, and 
the distortion of scholarship,” the university “is not only failing 
to meet its responsibilities to its students; it is betraying a pub¬ 
lic trust.” 

The extent of this betrayal might be argued; its existence, as a 
threatening tendency, is hardly in doubt. Senator Fulbright 
mentions one primary cause: the access to money and influence. 
Others might be mentioned: for example, a highly restrictive, 
almost universally shared ideology, and the inherent dynamics 
of professionalization. As to the former, Fulbright has cited 
elsewhere the observation of De Tocqueville: “I know of no 
country in which there is so little independence of mind and 
real freedom of discussion as in America.” Free institutions cer¬ 
tainly exist, but a tradition of passivity and conformism restricts 
their use—the cynic might say this is why they continue to exist. 
The impact of professionalization is also quite clear. The “free- 
floating intellectual” may occupy himself with problems be- 


24 



Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


cause of their inherent interest and importance, perhaps to little 
effect. The professional, however, tends to define his problems 
on the basis of the technique that he has mastered, and has a 
natural desire to apply his skills. Commenting on this process, 
Senator Clark quotes the remarks of Dr. Harold Agnew, direc¬ 
tor of the Los Alamos Laboratories Weapons Division: “The 
basis of advanced technology is innovation and nothing is more 
stifling to innovation than seeing one’s product not used or 
ruled out of consideration on flimsy premises involving public 
world opinion” 3 —“a shocking statement and a dangerous one,” 
as Clark rightly comments. In much the same way, behavioral 
scientists who believe themselves to be in possession of certain 
techniques of control and manipulation will tend to search for 
problems to which their knowledge and skills might be rele¬ 
vant, defining these as the “important problems”; and it will 
come as no surprise that they occasionally express their con¬ 
tempt for “flimsy premises involving public world opinion” that 
restrict the application of these skills. Thus among engineers, 
there are the “weapons cultists” who construct their bombs and 
missiles, and among the behavioral scientists, we find the tech¬ 
nicians who design and carry out “experiments with population 
and resources control methods” in Vietnam. 4 

These various factors—access to power, shared ideology, pro¬ 
fessionalization—may or may not be deplorable in themselves, 
but there can be no doubt that they interact so as to pose a 
serious threat to the integrity of scholarship in fields that are 
struggling for intellectual content and are thus particularly sus¬ 
ceptible to the workings of a kind of Gresham’s law. What is 
more, the subversion of scholarship poses a threat to society at 
large. The danger is particularly great in a society that encour¬ 
ages specialization and stands in awe of technical expertise. In 
such circumstances, the opportunities are great for the abuse of 


25 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


knowledge and technique—to be more exact, the claim to 
knowledge and technique. Taking note of these dangers, one 
reads with concern the claims of some social scientists that their 
discipline is essential for the training of those to whom they 
refer as “the mandarins of the future.” 5 Philosophy and litera¬ 
ture still “have their value,” so Ithiel Pool informs us, but it is 
psychology, sociology, systems analysis, and political science 
that provide the knowledge by which “men of power are 
humanized and civilized.” In no small measure, the Vietnam 
war was designed and executed by these new mandarins, and 
it testifies to the concept of humanity and civilization they are 
likely to bring to the exercise of power. 6 

Is the new access to power of the technical intelligentsia a 
delusion or a growing reality ? There are those who perceive the 
“skeletal structure of a new society” in which the leadership will 
rest “with the research corporation, the industrial laboratories, 
