
I speak of Senator Mansfield precisely because he is not a 
breast-beating superpatriot who wants America to rule the 
world, but is rather an American intellectual in the best sense, a 
scholarly and reasonable man—the kind of man who is the 
terror of our age. Perhaps this is merely a personal reaction, but 
when I look at what is happening to our country, what I find 
most terrifying is not Curtis LeMay, with his cheerful sugges¬ 
tion that we bomb our “enemies” back into the Stone Age, but 
rather the calm disquisitions of the political scientists on just 
how much force will be necessary to achieve our ends, or just 
what form of government will be acceptable to us in Vietnam. 
What I find terrifying is the detachment and equanimity with 
which we view and discuss an unbearable tragedy. We all know 
that if Russia or China were guilty of what we have done in 
Vietnam, we would be exploding with moral indignation at 
these monstrous crimes. 

There was, I think, a serious miscalculation in the planning of 
the Washington demonstrations. It was expected that the march 
to the Pentagon would be followed by a number of speeches, 
and that those who were committed to civil disobedience would 
then separate themselves from the crowd and go to the Penta¬ 
gon, a few hundred yards away across an open field. I had 
decided not to take part in civil disobedience, and I do not 
know in detail what had been planned. As everyone must real¬ 
ize, it is very hard to distinguish rationalization from rationality 
in such matters. I felt, however, that the first large-scale acts of 
civil disobedience should be more specifically defined, more 


371 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


clearly in support of those who are refusing to serve in Vietnam, 
on whom the real burden of dissent must inevitably fall. While 
appreciating the point of view of those who wished to express 
their hatred of the war in a more explicit way, I was not con¬ 
vinced that civil disobedience at the Pentagon would be either 
meaningful or effective. 

In any event, what actually happened was rather different 
from what anyone had anticipated. A few thousand people 
gathered for the speeches, but the mass of marchers went 
straight on to the Pentagon, some because they were committed 
to direct action, many because they were simply swept along. 
From the speakers’ platform where I stood it was difficult to 
