tank guns are being used in heavily populated city areas .” 85 
Robert Shaplen reported from Saigon: 

A dozen separate areas, comprising perhaps sixty or seventy 
blocks, had been totally burned out. These were almost all resi¬ 
dential areas. . . . Most of the damage was the result of rocket 
attacks by American armed helicopters or other planes, though 
some of it had been caused by artillery or ground fighting. ... A 
modern ten-million-dollar textile plant, containing forty thousand 
spindles, was entirely destroyed by bombs because it was sus¬ 
pected of being a Vietcong hideout. 

The correspondent for Le Monde —forced to leave the country 
soon after—reported that 

in the popular suburbs, the Front has proven that the only way to 
eliminate its control is through systematic destruction. To dis¬ 
lodge it, the air force had to level many residential areas. Fleeing 
the bombardments, tens of thousands of refugees have poured into 
the center of the city. 86 

Hue was virtually destroyed by American troops, block by 
block, house by house. According to an American military 
source, 119 American marines were killed in this operation, 
along with 1,584 “North Vietnamese” and some 3,000 civil¬ 
ians. 87 Charles Mohr reported that “in towns such as Hue, 
Vinhlong, Bentre and Mytho appalling destruction was 
wrought when encircled allied forces took the decision to de¬ 
stroy the attacking Vietcong forces by destroying the places they 
had occupied.” 88 

The American political scientist Milton Sacks has only this to 
say, in an article on these events: “In conventional terms, it now 


272 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


seems clear that the Communists have suffered a military defeat 
in their Tet offensive. They have expended the lives of thou¬ 
sands of their soldiers without securing a single province or dis¬ 
trict town of significance”—no word from this Southeast Asian 
expert about the means by which this “defeat” was accom¬ 
plished, or its political meaning. 89 American officials on the 
scene manage a somewhat broader view. One official, quoted 
by Charles Mohr, stated: “The Government won the recent 
battles, but it is important to consider how they won. At first 
the Vietcong had won and held everything in some towns ex¬ 
cept the American military compound and a South Vietnamese 
position.” Senator Mansfield is also aware of the realities: “. . . 
the hamlets, villages and the cities are seen to be honeycombed 
with a National Liberation Front infrastructure which has un¬ 
doubtedly existed for many years, which is still intact, and 
which may well be stronger than ever”; there is “not the begin¬ 
ning of a stable political situation” in South Vietnam 90 
In a broadcast from Saigon, Howard Tuchner of NBC stated 
that “there is no doubt that the U.S. military position in Viet¬ 
nam has never been weaker. U.S. officers in Saigon now feel for 
the first time that the United States can lose the war militar¬ 
ily.” 91 The military situation is not widely discussed, but it is 
indicated by a report that “more than 1000 planes and helicop¬ 
ters are reported destroyed or damaged, principally by Russian- 
built 122mm. rockets that have a range of eight miles or more.” 
According to an unidentified congressman, “one-third of the 
U.S. helicopter force in Vietnam has been destroyed or side¬ 
lined indefinitely . . . losses were almost as heavy in fixed wing 
aircraft, particularly in cargo planes.” The Navy is reported to 
have sent a helicopter carrier to the northern part of South 
Vietnam, in the apparent hope that NLF infiltrators will at least 
not succeed in penetrating this sanctuary. 92 


273 


+ - -; AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

In the Mekong Delta, the major cities suffered heavy damage 
—virtual destruction in some instances—as the Americans de¬ 
cided in case after case “to destroy the town in order to save it,” 
in the words of the American major responsible for the victory 
at Ben Tre 93 Still, in April, reports from the countryside are 
confused. However, the general situation is clear from the fact 
that the IVS has withdrawn most of its field workers because of 
“security conditions.” A volunteer reported in February: “The 
number of locations at which we can safely place a volunteer 
have significantly decreased in recent months”; another said 
that “we all knew that security in the countryside was getting 
worse and worse.” 94 According to a South Vietnamese senator, 
Vong A Sang, the government now controls “only one third of 
the country,” the remaining two thirds being occupied by the 
Vietcong 95 The nature of the American war is tersely indicated 
by an American official: “What the Vietcong did was occupy 
the hamlets we pacified just for the purpose of having the allies 
move in and bomb them out. By their presence, the hamlets 
were destroyed.” 96 The same report indicates that in Binh Dinh 
Province—the “showcase” province for pacification—this had 
