On the reasons for the remarkable success of pacification in Binh 
Dinh Province, see Bernard Fall, Last Reflections on a War (Garden 
City, N.Y., Doubleday & Company, Inc., 1967), p. 159. This was one 
of “the areas where American-Korean multidivision operations have 
literally smothered the opposition” with “vast search-and-destroy op¬ 
erations” and continuing “tight military control”—or so it seemed, 
until late 1967, and finally February 1968, when the lid blew off. A 
report on Binh Dinh Province, the “showcase” province for pacifica¬ 
tion, in the New York Times , February 20, tells the story. “The enemy 
moves in December—which several military men called a ‘softening 
up’ for the offensive—resulted in a wave of allied air strikes on vil¬ 
lages. Hundreds of homes were destroyed”—the standard American 
response. An American official reports: “What the Vietcong did was 
occupy the hamlets we pacified just for the purpose of having the allies 
move in and bomb them out. By their presence, the hamlets were 
destroyed.” No doubt our psychological warfare specialists are now 
explaining to the Vietnamese, who seem to have some difficulty under- 

131 


*= AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

standing these subtleties, that the destruction of the villages is the fault 
of the Vietcong. In any event, the report continues, “the entire 1968 
program for the province has now been shelved” and “the program is 
now set back anywhere from 14 to 18 months”—that is, back to the 
time of the initial saturation with American and Korean troops. “It 
has all gone down the drain,” said one gloomy American official. 

32. United States Policy and the Third World (Boston, Little, Brown 
and Company, 1967), Ch. 3. 

33. Morton H. Halperin, Contemporary Military Strategy (Boston, 
Little, Brown and Company, 1967), pp. 141-2. I am indebted to 
Herbert P. Bix for bringing this contribution to the social sciences to 
my attention. 

34. Wolf, op. cit., p. 69. 

35. There is little point in a lengthy discussion of Wolf’s concept of 
international affairs or his empirical studies. To take a few examples, 
he assumes without question that North Vietnam’s willingness to “dis¬ 
rupt the regime” in the South was motivated in part by “the marked 
economic and social improvements accomplished by the Diem regime 
from 1955 to 1960—dramatic by comparison with the economic stag¬ 
nation in North Vietnam” (for fact rather than fancy on relative 
development, see Buttinger, op. cit., Vol. 2, pp. 928, 966 f.); and also 
that India’s “moderately successful growth” was part of the motivation 
behind “China’s aggressive actions in October 1962.” See also note 36. 
As to the solidity of Wolf’s empirical studies, it is perhaps enough to 
note that his most significant result, the correlation between higher 
GNP and higher level of political democracy in Latin America, arises 
principally from the conclusion (based on data from 1950 to 1960) 
that Brazil and Argentina (along with Mexico and Chile) rank high 
on the scale of political democracy (cf. p. 124). The general level of 
sophistication is illustrated, for example, by a solemn reference to a 
consultant for having explained that in determining the “total military 
value” of a set of alternatives, it is not enough to sum up the separate 
values; one must also weight responses by probability of occurrence. 

36. “But in all cases, the primary consideration should be whether 
the proposed measure is likely to increase the cost and difficulties of 
insurgent operations and help to disrupt the insurgent organization, 
rather than whether it wins popular loyalty and support, or whether it 
contributes to a more productive, efficient, or equitable use of re¬ 
sources” (Wolf, op. cit., p. 69). We must understand that “successful 
132 



Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


counterinsurgency programs can be conducted among a rural popu¬ 
lace that is passive or even hostile, rather than loyal, to the govern¬ 
ment.” As evidence, Wolf cites his belief that “The growth of the Viet 
Cong and of the Pathet Lao probably occurred despite the opposition 
of a large majority of the people in both Vietnam and Laos” {ibid., p. 
48). If they can do it, so can we. 

In contrast, Robert Scigliano (of the Michigan State University 
Vietnam Advisory Group) reported that “using the estimate of Amer¬ 
ican officials in Saigon at the end of 1962, about one-half of the South 
Vietnamese support the NLF” {South Vietnam: Nation Under Stress 
[Boston, Houghton Mifflin Company, 1963], p. 145). Arthur Dom- 
men reports {Conflict in Laos: The Politics of Neutralization [New 
York, Frederick A. Praeger, Inc., 1964]) that “the Pathet Lao needed no 
propaganda to turn the rural population against the townspeople” (p. 
107). The American Mission took care of this, with its lavish aid {]/ 2 
of 1 percent of which was spent on agriculture, the livelihood of 96 per¬ 
cent of the population) leading to immense corruption, the proliferation 
of luxurious villas and large automobiles alongside of grinding poverty; 
and with its constant subversion in support, first of the “pro-Western 
neutralist” Phoui Sananikone, and then of the military dictator Phoumi 
Nosavan. As Roger Hilsman puts it, the real Pathet Lao “threat” was 
“expansion of political control based on winning peasant support in the 
villages” {To Move a Nation , [Garden City, N.Y., Doubleday & Com¬ 
pany, Inc., 1967], p. 112). The lack of support for the Pathet Lao was 
amply demonstrated in the 1958 elections, in which 9 of their 13 
