cated on the assumption that the Western democracies would join the 
antifascist effort if only Spain could be preserved as, in effect, a 
Western colony. Once the Communist leaders saw the futility of this 
hope, they abandoned the struggle, which was not in their eyes an 
effort to win the Civil War, but only to serve the interests of Russian 
foreign policy. I also disagree with Hobsbawm’s analysis of the 
anarchist revolution, cited earlier, for reasons that are implicit in this 
entire discussion. 

76. Op. cit., pp. 143-44. 

77. Cited by Rosenberg, op. cit., pp. 168-69. 

78. Bolloten, op. cit., p. 84. 

79. Ibid., p. S5. As noted earlier, the “small farmer” included the 
prosperous orange growers, etc. (see note 65). 

80. Brenan, op. cit., p. 321. 

81. Correspondence from Companys to Prieto, 1939. While Com- 
panys, as a Catalonian with separatist impulses, would naturally be 
inclined to defend Catalonian achievements, he was surely not sympa¬ 
thetic to collectivization, despite his cooperative attitude during the 
period when the anarchists, with real power in their hands, permitted 
him to retain nominal authority. I know of no attempt to challenge the 
accuracy of his assessment. Morrow {op. cit., p. 77) quotes the 
Catalonian Premier, the entrepreneur Juan Tarradellas, as defending 
the administration of the collectivized war industries against a Com¬ 
munist (PSUC) attack, which he termed the “most arbitrary false¬ 
hoods.” There are many other reports commenting on the functioning 
of the collectivized industries by nonanarchist firsthand observers, that 
tend to support Companys. For example, the Swiss socialist Andres 
Oltmares is quoted by Rocker {The Tragedy of Spain, p. 24) as saying 
that after the revolution the Catalonian workers’ syndicates “in seven 


142 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


weeks accomplished fully as much as France did in fourteen months 
after the outbreak of the World War.” Continuing, he says: 

In the midst of the civil war the Anarchists have proved themselves 
to be political organizers of the first rank. They kindled in everyone 
the required sense of responsibility, and knew how by eloquent appeals 
to keep alive the spirit of sacrifice for the general welfare of the people. 
