is that of liberating the masses from old notions implanted by a 
long period of exploitative rule by military cliques and feudalistic 
habits and of dispelling the illusions created by Communist ideol¬ 
ogy. Furthermore, the philosophy of the state calls for a proper 
understanding by the masses of the true nature of righteous gov¬ 
ernment, the reasons behind the establishment of the state, and 
the current state of affairs. The insurgents should be given an 
opportunity to alter their misconceived notions and to become 
good citizens. This is why the operation for the inducement of 
surrender has such grave significance. 

A continuing problem was the “nearly universal phenomenon in 
Manchuria that the insurgent groups return to their original 
state of operation as soon as the subjugation period is termi¬ 
nated and troops are withdrawn.” 79 To counter this tendency, a 
number of methods were used, with considerable success. 
Communist groups were heavily infiltrated and alienation was 
created within the guerrilla groups. The formerly anti-Japanese 
Korean community was won over by “sociopolitical and accom¬ 
panying psychological changes” (“revolutionary development,” 
in modern phraseology), specifically, by offering them “the pos¬ 
sibility of owning land and escaping from the control of their 
Chinese landlords” (Lee, p. 23). Among the Chinese, the situa¬ 
tion was different, and more difficult. 

Through propaganda and example, the guerrillas awakened the 
patriotism of the people and convinced them that the guerrillas 
were the only true defenders of their interests. When necessary, 
the guerrillas terrorized the reluctant elements as a warning to 
others. An intricate network of anti-Japanese societies, peasant 
societies, and the like provided the guerrillas both with the neces¬ 
sary supplies and with vital intelligence. Farmers who were 
located in regions too remote to be protected by the Manchukuo 
authorities and the Japanese were forced to comply with the 

197 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


guerrillas’ demands, even if they had no desire to assist the in¬ 
surgent cause. [Lee, p. 25] 

The obvious answer to this problem was a system of “col¬ 
lective hamlets.” By the end of 1937, the Police Affairs Head¬ 
quarters reported that over 10,000 hamlets had been organized 
