are trying to do is “eliminate their source of life (the land and 
the people),” and then goes on cheerily and dutifully to do her 
job, helping to restore what has been destroyed. More to the 
point, several hundred thousand citizens of Greater Boston—the 
cultural capital of the United States, they would like to believe 
—may have read that letter and gone on to do their jobs. Why 
not? It is no more harrowing than dozens of other things they 
have seen and read. In fact, it is doubtful whether there is 
anything we could do to the people of Vietnam (the Com¬ 
munists, that is) that would cause more than a momentary 
shudder. 

A few weeks earlier the citizens of Boston read an article in 
the same place on the Globe editorial page by the chairman of 


12 



Introduction 


the department of government at Harvard University, in which 
he described the process of urbanization in South Vietnam, an 
interesting sociological phenomenon which opens up a whole 
range of new possibilities for nation building. 5 He spares us the 
details of how “the United States is urbanizing the people of 
Vietnam/’ but others have described the process—for example, 
the IVS worker just quoted. Urbanization, of course, is that 
“funny thing” that we’re doing to the people of Vietnam. It is 
the process described in the following terms by Don Luce, who 
resigned as director of IVS in late 1967 in protest against 
United States policy, after nine years in the field: 

Less “fortunate” villagers [than those in “pacified” villages] have 
been uprooted from their traditional homes and placed in refugee 
camps that crowd around the cities. These bleak camps are made 
up almost completely of women and children who deeply resent 
having been tom away from their farmlands and way of life, 
away from their ancestral burial grounds, and even away from 
their husbands—who are usually with the Vietcong. Their old 
village usually becomes part of a free strike zone. This means that 
planes can drop bombs anywhere in that area and that anyone 
caught there will be considered a Vietcong and shot. Unfortu¬ 
nately, many of the refugees go back to harvest their rice or 
wander into these areas to gather wood or thatch. In Tuy Hoa, 
one of the IVS members was asked to give blood at the provincial 
hospital where he was working on a part-time basis. He asked an 
old man waiting in the hospital what had happened. The old man 
replied bitterly, “My son and four others went to cut wood. On 
their return an American helicopter hovered over. Frightened, 
they ran. Four were wounded; one was killed .” 6 

In short, urbanization is the process by which you “eliminate 
their source of life (the land and the people), ruin the land and 
concentrate the people into areas you can protect.” This every¬ 
one understands. Yet there is scarcely a ripple of protest when 
the chairman of the department of government at our greatest 

13 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


university speaks of the sociological process of urbanization, the 
benefits it provides for the Vietnamese, and the possibilities it 
offers us to win the war. 

This calm and analytic attitude towards the problem of how 
to win the war can be illustrated with innumerable examples 
from the writings of responsible political analysts. To pick just 
one, consider some remarks by Joseph Harsch on the bombing 
tactics in North Vietnam. 7 Mr. Harsch discusses the frustrations 
of the limited-bombing policy: 

A bomb dropped into a leafy jungle produces no visible result. 
Even if it hits a truck carrying ammunition the pilot seldom has 
the satisfaction of knowing what he achieved. A hit on a big 
hydroelectric dam is another matter. There is a huge explosion 
visible from anywhere above. The dam can be seen to fall. The 
waters can be seen to pour through the breach and drown out 
huge areas of farm land, and villages, in its path. The pilot who 
takes out a hydroelectric dam gets back home with a feeling of 
accomplishment. Novels are written and films are made of such 
exploits. . . . The bomb which takes out the dam will flood 
villages, drown people, destroy crops, and knock out some elec¬ 
tric power. . . . Bombing the dam would hurt people. Every dam 
taken out would give more reason for claiming that “the enemy is 
hurting.” In theory, if he can be “hurt” enough his government 
should be more inclined to go to the conference table. 

Despite all of these advantages of bombing dams, Harsch ap¬ 
parently believes that it is more reasonable to bomb trucks. The 
reason is that “there is no evidence that this causing of pain to 
civilians in North Vietnam” has had the effect of persuading 
