priate as today. 

The task of the revolutionary pacifist is spelled out more fully 
in the final paragraph of the essay. 

Those who can bring themselves to renounce wealth, position and 
power accruing from a social system based on violence and put¬ 
ting a premium on acquisitiveness, and to identify themselves in 
some real fashion with the struggle of the masses toward the 
light, may help in a measure—more, doubtless, by life than by 
words—to devise a more excellent way, a technique of social 
progress less crude, brutal, costly and slow than mankind has yet 
evolved. 

It is a remarkable tribute to A. J. Muste that his life’s work 
can be measured by such standards as these. His essays are 
invariably thoughtful and provocative; his life, however, is an 
inspiration with hardly a parallel in twentieth-century America. 
Muste believed, with Gandhi, that “unjust laws and practices 
survive because men obey them and conform to them. This they 
do out of fear. There are things they dread more than the 
continuance of the evil.” He enriched half a century of Ameri¬ 
can history with a personal commitment to these simple truths. 
His efforts began in a time when “men believed that a better 
human order, a classless and warless world, a socialist society, if 
you please, could be achieved,” a time when the labor move- 

161 


*= AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

ment could be described as “that remarkable combination of 
mass power, prophetic idealism and utopian hope.” They con¬ 
tinued through the general disillusionment of war and depres¬ 
sion and antiradical hysteria, to the days when American soci¬ 
ologists could proclaim that “the realization that escapes no one 
is that the egalitarian and socially mobile society which the 'free- 
floating intellectuals’ associated with the Marxist tradition have 
been calling for during the last hundred years has finally 
emerged in the form of our cumbersome, bureaucratic mass 
society, and has in turn engulfed the heretics.” 2 And finally, still 
not “engulfed,” he persisted in his refusal to be one of the 
obedient, docile men who are the terror of our time, to the 
moment when our “egalitarian and socially mobile society” is 
facing a virtual rebellion from the lower depths, when young 
men are being faced every day with the questions posed at 
Nuremberg as their country devotes itself to enforcing the “sta¬ 
bility” of the graveyard and the bulldozed village, and when 
the realization that escapes no one is that something is drasti¬ 
cally wrong in American society. 

In one of his last published essays, Muste describes himself as 
an “unrepentant unilateralist, on political as well as moral 
grounds.” 3 In part, he bases his position on an absolute moral 
commitment that one may accept or reject, but that cannot be 
profitably debated. In part, he defends it on grounds that seem 
to me not very persuasive, a psychological principle that “like 
produces like, kindness provokes kindness,” hence an appeal to 
“the essential humanity of the enemy.” 4 It is very difficult to 
retain a faith in the “essential humanity” of the SS trooper 
or the commissar or the racist blinded with hate and fear, or, 
for that matter, the insensate victim of a lifetime of anti-Com- 
munist indoctrination. When the enemy is a remote technician 
programming B-52 raids or “pacification,” there is no possibility 


162 


The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


for a human confrontation and the psychological basis for 
nonviolent tactics, whatever it may be, simply evaporates. 
A society that is capable of producing concepts like “un- 
American” and “peacenik”—of turning “peace” into a dirty 
word—has advanced a long way towards immunizing the indi¬ 
vidual against any human appeal. American society has reached 
the stage of near total immersion in ideology. The commitment 
has vanished from consciousness—what else can a right-think¬ 
ing person possibly believe? Americans are simply “pragmatic,” 
and they must bring others to this happy state. Thus an official 
of the Agency for International Development can write, with 
no trace of irony, that our goal is to move nations “from doctri¬ 
naire reliance on state enterprise to a pragmatic support of 
private initiative,” 5 and a headline in the New York Times can 
refer to Indian capitulation to American demands concerning 
the conditions of foreign investment as India's “drift from so¬ 
cialism to pragmatism” (see page 355 below). With this narrow¬ 
ing of the range of the thinkable comes an inability to compre¬ 
hend how the weak and dispossessed can resist our benevolent 
manipulation of their lives, an incapacity to react in human 
terms to the misery that we impose. 

The only useful way to evaluate the program of unilateral 
revolutionary pacifism is to consider what it implies in concrete 
historical circumstances. As a prescription for the United States 
in the mid-sixties, it is much too easy to defend. There is no 
particular merit in being more reasonable than a lunatic; corre¬ 
