science can explain, they are not part of a responsible moderniz¬ 
ing elite, and therefore have only a superficial biological resem¬ 
blance to the human race. 

In no small measure, it is attitudes like this that lie behind the 
butchery in Vietnam, and we had better face up to them with 
candor, or we will find our government leading us towards a 
“final solution” in Vietnam, and in the many Vietnams that 
inevitably lie ahead. 

Let me finally return to Macdonald and the responsibility of 
intellectuals. Macdonald quotes an interview with a death- 
camp paymaster who bursts into tears when told that the Rus¬ 
sians would hang him. “Why should they? What have I done?” 
he asked. Macdonald concludes: “Only those who are willing to 
resist authority themselves when it conflicts too intolerably with 
their personal moral code, only they have the right to condemn 
the death-camp paymaster.” The question “What have I done?” 


358 



The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


is one that we may well ask ourselves, as we read, each day, of 
fresh atrocities in Vietnam—as we create, or mouth, or tolerate 
the deceptions that will be used to justify the next defense of 
freedom. 


Notes 

I. Such a research project has now been undertaken and published as 
a “Citizens’ White Paper”: F. Schurmann, P. D. Scott, and R. Zelnik, 
The Politics of Escalation in Vietnam (New York, Fawcett World 
Library, and Boston, Beacon Press, 1966). For further evidence of 
American rejection of United Nations initiatives for diplomatic set¬ 
tlement, just prior to the major escalation of February 1965, see 
Mario Rossi, “The US Rebuff to U Thant,” New York Review of 
Books , November 17, 1966. See also Theodore Draper, “How Not To 
Negotiate,” New York Review of Books , May 4, 1967. There is fur¬ 
ther documentary evidence of NLF attempts to establish a coalition 
government and to neutralize the area, all rejected by the United 
States and its Saigon ally, in Douglas Pike, Viet Cong (Cambridge, 
Mass., The M.I.T. Press, 1966). In reading material of this latter sort 
one must be especially careful to distinguish between the evidence 
presented and the “conclusions” that are asserted, for reasons noted 
