of practicing. Hitler’s depredations, his Dachaus and Belsens . . . 
pale into insignificance before this imperialist savagery. . . .” 46 
Such a reaction to centuries of selfless and tender care might 
cause some surprise, until we realize that it is probably only an 
expression of the enormous guilt felt by the beneficiary of these 
attentions. 

A generation ago, there were other political leaders who 
feared the effect of Communist gains on their safety and 
progress, and who, with the almost unanimous support of pub¬ 
lic opinion, set out to improve the world through forceful inter- 

71 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


in¬ 
vention —filling power vacuums, establishing territorial bases 
essential to their total security and world aims, imposing politi¬ 
cal and social objectives on participating elements. Professor 
Adam has little to tell us that is new. 


II 

The examples of counterrevolutionary subordination that I 
have so far cited have for the most part been drawn from 
political science and the study of international, particularly 
Asian, affairs—rather dismal branches of American scholarship, 
by and large, and so closely identified with American imperial 
goals that one is hardly astonished to discover the widespread 
abandonment of civilized norms. In opening this discussion, 
however, I referred to a far more general issue. If it is plausible 
that ideology will in general serve as a mask for self-interest, 
then it is a natural presumption that intellectuals, in interpret¬ 
ing history or formulating policy, will tend to adopt an elitist 
position, condemning popular movements and mass participa¬ 
tion in decision making, and emphasizing rather the necessity 
for supervision by those who possess the knowledge and under¬ 
standing that is required (so they claim) to manage society and 
control social change. This is hardly a novel thought. One major 
element in the anarchist critique of Marxism a century ago was 
the prediction that, as Bakunin formulated it: 

According to the theory of Mr. Marx, the people not only must 
not destroy [the state] but must strengthen it and place it at the 
complete disposal of their benefactors, guardians, and teachers— 
the leaders of the Communist party, namely Mr. Marx and his 
friends, who will proceed to liberate [mankind] in their own 
way. They will concentrate the reins of government in a strong 
hand, because the ignorant people require an exceedingly firm 
guardianship; they will establish a single state bank, concentrab 


7 ? 




Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


ing in its hands all commercial, industrial, agricultural and even 
scientific production, and then divide the masses into two armies 
—industrial and agricultural—under the direct command of the 
state engineers, who will constitute a new privileged scientific- 
political estate . 47 

One cannot fail to be struck by the parallel between this predic¬ 
tion and that of Daniel Bell, cited earlier—the prediction that 
in the new postindustrial society, “not only the best talents, but 
eventually the entire complex of social prestige and social 
status, will be rooted in the intellectual and scientific communi¬ 
ties. ,?48 Pursuing the parallel for a moment, it might be asked 
whether the left-wing critique of Leninist elitism can be ap¬ 
plied, under very different conditions, to the liberal ideology of 
the intellectual elite that aspires to a dominant role in managing 
the welfare state. 

Rosa Luxemburg, in 1918, argued that Bolshevik elitism 
would lead to a state of society in which the bureaucracy alone 
would remain an active element in social life—though now it 
would be the “red bureaucracy” of that State Socialism that 
Bakunin had long before described as “the most vile and terri¬ 
ble lie that our century has created.” 49 A true social revolution 
requires a “spiritual transformation in the masses degraded by 
centuries of bourgeois class rule”; 50 “it is only by extirpating 
the habits of obedience and servility to the last root that the 
working class can acquire the understanding of a new form of 
discipline, self-discipline arising from free consent.” 51 Writing 
in 1904, she predicted that Lenin’s organizational concepts 
would “enslave a young labor movement to an intellectual elite 
hungry for power . . . and turn it into an automaton manipu¬ 
lated by a Central Committee.” 52 In the Bolshevik elitist doc¬ 
trine of 1918 she saw a disparagement of the creative, spon¬ 
taneous, self-correcting force of mass action, which alone, she 


