quences, as do the sciences he is attempting to mimic. He sim¬ 
ply suggests a terminology and provides a fagade of rationality. 
When particular policy conclusions are drawn, they are sup¬ 
ported only by ex cathedra remarks for which no support is 
even suggested (e.g., “The civil defense line probably should be 
drawn somewhere below $5 billion annually” to keep from pro¬ 
voking the Russians—why not $50 billion, or $5?). What is 
more, Kahn is quite aware of this vacuity; in his more judicious 
moments he claims only that “there is no reason to believe that 
relatively sophisticated models are more likely to be misleading 
than the simpler models and analogies frequently used as an aid 
to judgment.” For those whose humor tends towards the maca¬ 
bre, it is easy to play the game of “strategic thinking” a la Kahn, 
and to prove what one wishes. For example, one of Kahn’s basic 
assumptions is that “an all-out surprise attack in which all re¬ 
sources are devoted to counter-value targets would be so irra¬ 
tional that, barring an incredible lack of sophistication or actual 


340 


The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


insanity among Soviet decision makers, such an attack is highly 
unlikely.” A simple argument proves the opposite. Premise 1: 
American decision makers think along the lines outlined by 
Herman Kahn. Premise 2: Kahn thinks it would be better for 
everyone to be red than for everyone to be dead. Premise 3: If 
the Americans were to respond to an all-out counter-value at¬ 
tack, then everyone would be dead. Conclusion: The Americans 
will not respond to an all-out counter-value attack, and therefore 
it should be launched without delay. Of course, one can carry 
the argument a step further. Fact: The Russians have not car¬ 
ried out an all-out counter-value attack. It follows that they are 
not rational. If they are not rational, there is no point in “stra¬ 
tegic thinking.” Therefore . . . 

Of course this is all nonsense, but nonsense that differs from 
Kahn's only in the respect that the argument is of slightly 
greater complexity than anything to be discovered in his work. 
What is remarkable is that serious people actually pay attention 
to these absurdities, no doubt because of the facade of tough¬ 
mindedness and pseudoscience. 

It is a curious and depressing fact that the “antiwar move¬ 
ment” falls prey all too often to similar confusions. In the fall of 
1965, for example, there was an International Conference on 
Alternative Perspectives on Vietnam, which circulated a pam¬ 
phlet to potential participants stating its assumptions. The plan 
was to set up study groups in which three “types of intellectual 
tradition” will be represented: (1) area specialists; (2) “social 
theory, with special emphasis on theories of the international 
system, of social change and development, of conflict and con¬ 
flict resolution, or of revolution”; (3) “the analysis of public 
policy in terms of basic human values, rooted in various theo¬ 
logical, philosophical and humanist traditions.” The second in¬ 
tellectual tradition will provide “general propositions, derived 

341 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


from social theory and tested against historical, comparative, or 
experimental data”; the third “will provide the framework out 
of which fundamental value questions can be raised and in 
terms of which the moral implications of societal actions can be 
analyzed.” The hope was that “by approaching the questions 
[of Vietnam policy] from the moral perspectives of all great 
religions and philosophical systems, we may find solutions that 
are more consistent with fundamental human values than cur¬ 
rent American policy in Vietnam has turned out to be.” 

In short, the experts on values (i.e., spokesmen for the great 
religions and philosophical systems) will provide fundamental 
insights on moral perspectives, and the experts on social theory 
will provide general empirically validated propositions and 
“general models of conflict.” From this interplay, new policies 
will emerge, presumably from application of the canons of sci¬ 
entific method. The only debatable issue, it seems to me, is 
whether it is more ridiculous to turn to experts in social theory 
for general well-confirmed propositions, or to the specialists in 
the great religions and philosophical systems for insights into 
fundamental human values. 

There is much more that can be said about this topic, but 
without continuing, I would simply like to emphasize that, as is 
no doubt obvious, the cult of the expert is both self-serving, for 
those who propound it, and fraudulent. Obviously, one must 
learn from social and behavioral science whatever one can; ob¬ 
viously, these fields should be pursued in as serious a way as is 
possible. But it will be quite unfortunate, and highly dangerous, 
if they are not accepted and judged on their merits and accord¬ 
ing to their actual, not pretended, accomplishments. In particu¬ 
lar, if there is a body of theory, well tested and verified, that 
applies to the conduct of foreign affairs or the resolution of 
domestic or international conflict, its existence has been kept a 
