assistance to those who refuse to serve in Vietnam, who wish to 
increase the political cost of repression by standing alongside 
the young men w T ho will inevitably suffer most severely. Think¬ 
ing in still more long-range terms, it may be that the most 
significant steps towards a reform of American society will 
prove to be the efforts of the very courageous and unsung few 
who are devoting themselves to community organizing, often 
using the draft and its inequities as a point of entry into com¬ 
munities that provide the mass base for American repression, 
and seeking to create both consciousness and organizational 
structure for resistance on the part of those who bear the heavi¬ 
est burdens but who are, for the present, passive victims of an 
unchallenged coercive ideology. The national RESIST organi¬ 
zation is attempting to provide the framework for a range of 
such activities, using as a basis the Call To Resist Illegitimate 
Authority (most of which appeared as an advertisement in the 
New York Review of Books on October 12, 1967). With all of 
the necessary qualifications, I feel that involvement in this effort 
is the most effective form of political action against this and 
future wars that is now open to a concerned citizen. 

Those of us who are not under direct attack and who are rela¬ 
tively free to choose a course of action have a responsibility to 
the victims of American power that we must face with unwaver¬ 
ing seriousness. In considering some tactic of protest or resist¬ 
ance, we must ask what its consequences are likely to be for the 
people of Vietnam or of Guatemala or of Harlem, and what effect 
it will have on the building of a movement against war and op¬ 
pression, a movement that will help to create a society in which 
one can live without fear and without shame. We have to search 
for ways to persuade vast numbers of Americans to commit them¬ 
selves to this task, and we must devise ways to convert this 


397 


* = AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

commitment into effective action. The goal may seem so remote 
as to be a fantasy, but for those who are serious, this is the only 
strategy that can be considered. Persuasion may involve deeds as 
well as words; it may involve the construction of institutions 
and social forms, even if only in microcosm, that overcome the 
competitiveness and the single-minded pursuit of self-interest 
that proves a mechanism of social control as effective as that of 
a totalitarian state. But the goal must be to design and construct 
alternatives to the present ideology and social institutions that 
are more compelling on intellectual and moral grounds, and that 
can draw to them masses of Americans who find that these al¬ 
ternatives satisfy their human needs—including the human need 
to show compassion, to encourage and to assist those who seek to 
raise themselves from the misery and degradation that our so¬ 
ciety has helped to impose and now seeks to perpetuate. 

It would be criminal folly to fail to act when there are oppor¬ 
tunities to move towards these goals, or to act in such a way as 
to make them still more distant than they are today. It is not 
easy to find a way to steer between these dangers. There is no 
doubt that in the recent past, the error has consistently been on 
the side of caution and restraint, fear and moral blindness. But 
one must bear in mind, as tensions mount, that the opposite error 
is no less serious. It is quite easy to design tactics that will help 
to consolidate the latent forces of a potential American fascism. 
To mention just one obvious example, verbal and physical abuse 
of the police, however great the provocation, can have only this 
effect. Such tactics may seem “radical” and, in a narrow sense, 
justified by the magnitude of the infamy and evil that they seek 
to overcome. They are not. 

In fact, it is senseless to speak—as many now do—of tactics 
and actions as being “radical,” “liberal,” “conservative,” or “re¬ 
actionary.” In itself, an action cannot be placed on a political 


398 



Supplement to “On Resistance’’ 


dimension at all. It may be successful or unsuccessful in achiev¬ 
ing an end that can be described in political terms. But it is use¬ 
ful to remember that the same tactics that one man may propose 
with high conscience and deep commitment to radical social 
change may also be pressed by a well-placed police spy, bent on 
destroying such a movement and increasing popular support for 
the forces of repression. Consider the Reichstag fire, to return to 
a day that is less remote than one would wish. Or consider the act 
of a seventeen-year-old Jewish refugee from Poland just thirty 
years ago—of Herschel Grynszpan, who assassinated a German 
official in Paris in November 1938. It is difficult to condemn this 
desperate act, which set off violent pogroms throughout Germany 
and helped entrench more deeply the Nazi regime of terror; but 
the victims of Nazi terror would offer no thanks to Herschel 
Grynszpan. We must not abandon the victims of American power, 
or play games with their fate. We must not consent to have the 
same repression imposed on still further helpless victims or the 
same blind fury unleashed against them. Acts that seem perfectly 
