
Mr. Poats had been, for the preceding three years, “the No. 1 
man overseeing our economic program, the so-called ‘other war’ 
in Vietnam,” and had just been promoted to deputy director of 
the Agency for International Development. According to this 
testimony, as Congressman Riegle reports it, “the annual U.S. 
commodity import program in Vietnam is actually a political 
ransom paid to powerful South Vietnamese commercial inter¬ 
ests to insure political stability in South Vietnam, and insure 
their continued support of the war.” Poats agreed with Con¬ 
gressman Riegle’s summary statement that “if we were to with¬ 
draw our AID program, ... the government would likely col¬ 
lapse over there, and for all intents and purposes the war would 
be over,” and that “if this war were conducted in a way that 
required greater economic sacrifices by certain elements in 
Vietnam, the political instability is such that the country might 
fly apart.” The situation is such that “there would not be mili¬ 
tary action by the Vietnamese military forces today had it not 
been for our provision of commercial imports,” because of the 
resulting “inflation, disruption, and loss of morale.” He also 
agreed that “there is certainly a substantial element of truth” in 
Congressman Riegle’s judgment that without the “ransom,” 
commercial interests in South Vietnam would “get their sympa¬ 
thizers out in the streets and bring down the Government” 
(though he felt this judgment to be “harsh”). Congressman 
Riegle concludes that “if we cannot establish some sort of bal- 


237 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


ance between self-sufficiency . . . versus a growing dependency, 
then we will never get out of this situation. We will be mired 
down there forever. 5 ’ He adds that “all the evidence that piles 
up on the military side and on the nonmilitary side” shows a 
growing dependency. According to Mr. Poats, “that is certainly 
a danger, and in some instances a fair conclusion.” It would 
follow, then, if this assessment is accurate, that “we will be 
mired down there forever.” 

One might compare this testimony with a report by the 
French resident minister in 1897: 

[The only collaborators are] intriguers, disreputable or ignorant, 
whom we [the French] had rigged out with sometimes high 
ranks, which became tools in their hands for plundering the 
country without scruple. . . . Despised, they possessed neither the 
spiritual culture nor the moral fibre that would have allowed 
them to understand and carry out their task . 38 

Apart from its rhetorical flair, this might be the testimony of 
Rutherford Poats today. Mr. Poats’s testimony will come as no 
surprise to those who have been paying attention to the la¬ 
ments of senior American officials in Saigon. In 1959, one such 
official 39 commented that “in the case of Free Viet-Nam the 
lack of even a bare minimum of economic self-sufficiency makes 
enduring political independence only an illusion,” and com¬ 
plained that “the majority of the aid is used in a manner that 
maintains an extravagant standard of living.” “The Viet-Minh,” 
he said, “. . . can make a strong case that the United States is 
effectively replacing France as the new master of Free Viet- 
Nam.” Poats’s testimony simply shows how little things have 
changed. Many additional illustrations of the character of the 
collaborationist elements might be cited. 40 The whole situation 
recalls vividly other episodes in the history of colonialism, for 
example, the situation in the Philippines during the period of 


238 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


the Japanese occupation. The prospects are for deepening 
misery and still further devastation, so long as the American 
occupation continues. 

Christopher Lydon, the Boston Globe correspondent who ac¬ 
companied General Gavin on his recent trip to Vietnam, con¬ 
cluded a series of articles reporting his impressions with a quo¬ 
tation from Ton That Thien, managing editor of the Vietnam 
Guardian, which was suppressed by the Saigon regime when it 
printed a report questioning the official claim that Assembly 
member Tran Van Van was assassinated by the Vietcong. Thien 
defines what he sees as the only possible American “victory”: 

You cannot defeat the other side militarily unless you devote the 
next 30 or 40 years to it. You can win if you keep killing for a 
generation. You simply exterminate all the Vietnamese—the way 
you killed the Indians in America—and there will be no more 
war. 

Lydon comments: “This agony, if not utter desperation, among 
what seemed to me the most sensitive and patriotic Vietnamese, 
about the burden of American arms on their country is the 
overriding impression I carry back from this tortured capital.” 41 
