there is no powerful outside force that can call us to account— 
the change will have to come from within. 

I have been speaking only of oppression overseas, but it need 
hardly be emphasized that there is a domestic analogue. The 
reaction to the suffering of oppressed minorities at home is not 
very different from the brutal apathy towards the misery we 
have imposed elsewhere in the world. Opposition to the war in 
Vietnam is based very largely on its cost, and on the failure of 
American power to crush Vietnamese resistance. It is sad, but 
nonetheless true, that the tiny steps to bring freedom to black 
Americans have been taken, for the most part, out of fear. We 
must recognize these facts and regret them deeply, but not be 
paralyzed by this recognition. Anger, outrage, confessions of 
overwhelming guilt may be good therapy; they can also become 
a barrier to effective action, which can always be made to seem 
incommensurable with the enormity of the crime. Nothing is 
easier than to adopt a new form of self-indulgence, no less 
debilitating than the old apathy. The danger is substantial. It is 
hardly a novel insight that confession of guilt can be institu¬ 
tionalized as a technique for evading what must be done. It is 
even possible to achieve a feeling of satisfaction by contem¬ 
plating one’s evil nature. No less insidious is the cry for “revolu¬ 
tion,” at a time when not even the germs of new institutions 
exist, let alone the moral and political consciousness that could 
lead to a basic modification of social life. If there will be a 
“revolution” in America today, it will no doubt be a move to¬ 
wards some variety of fascism. We must guard against the kind 
of revolutionary rhetoric that would have had Karl Marx burn 
down the British Museum because it was merely part of a re¬ 
pressive society. It would be criminal to overlook the serious 
flaws and inadequacies in our institutions, or to fail to utilize 


17 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


the substantial degree of freedom that most of us enjoy, within 
the framework of these flawed institutions, to modify them or 
even replace them by a better social order. One who pays some 
attention to history will not be surprised if those who cry most 
loudly that we must smash and destroy are later found among 
the administrators of some new system of repression. 

Someday the war in Vietnam will end, and with it the re¬ 
newed impulse it has given to self-analysis and the search for 
cures and alternatives. Those who were opposed to the war 
merely because of its costs or its atrocities will fall away. It is 
possible that an American defeat that cannot be disguised, or a 
“victory 77 that opens the way to new savagery, will be accom¬ 
panied by a serious domestic repression that will leave little 
energy or will for the task of re-evaluation and reconstruction of 
ideology and social life. But there are also encouraging signs. 
There is a growing realization that it is an illusion to believe 
that all will be well if only today's liberal hero can be placed in 
the White House, and a growing awareness that isolated, com¬ 
peting individuals can rarely confront repressive institutions 
alone. At best, a few may be tolerated as intellectual gadflies. 
The mass, even under formal democracy, will accept “the 
values that have been inculcated, often accidentally and often 
deliberately by vested interests , 77 values that have the status of 
“unconsciously acquired habits rather than choices . 7710 In a 
fragmented, competitive society, individuals can neither dis¬ 
cover their true interests nor act to defend them, as they cannot 
do so when prevented from free association by totalitarian con¬ 
trols. Recognition of these facts has brought young men to¬ 
gether in various forms of resistance and has given rise to the 
little-known but very impressive attempts at community organ¬ 
izing in many parts of the country; it also apparently moti¬ 
vates many of the spokesmen for “black power . 77 It is interesting 


18 


Introduction 


to see how classical ideas of libertarian socialism have found 
their way into the ideology of the “New Left.” Such statements 
as the following have become near cliches—not therefore false or 
unimportant: Our social system has “sacrificed the general in¬ 
terests of human society to the private interests of individ¬ 
uals, and thus systematically undermined a true relationship 
between men”; “Democracy with its motto of equality oj all 
citizens before the law and Liberalism with its right of man 
over his own person both were wrecked on the realities of 
capitalist economy”; “The greatest evil of any form of power is 
just that it always tries to force the rich diversity of social life 
into definite forms and adjust it to particular norms”; 

Political rights do not originate in parliaments; they are rather 
forced upon them from without. And even their enactment into 
law has for a long time been no guarantee of their security. They 
do not exist because they have been legally set down on a piece of 
paper, but only when they have become the ingrown habit of a 
people, and when any attempt to impair them will meet with the 
