
The U.S. position in the Pacific is no longer what it was in 1941. 
The territory which came under direct Japanese attack early in 
the war, the Hawaiian islands and the Aleutians, are each sov- 


268 




The Logic of Withdrawal 


ereign states today. . . . Yet Hawaii is closer to Peking than it is to 
Washington, D.C. The Aleutian islands at their westernmost tip 
are closer to China than they are to Seattle, Washington. Where 
once the security of the United States could conveniently, it 
seemed, rest on Alaska and Hawaii in the Pacific, these two states 
now have the right to demand the same kind of security which 
each of them once helped furnish to the continental United 
States. 

Consider the implications. Our allies and our bases in Taiwan, 
Camranh Bay, Thailand, also have the right to demand 
the same kind of security which each of them now helps furnish 
to Alaska and Hawaii. And so on, indefinitely. Of course, we 
have heard all of this before. Japan once needed Manchuria for 
survival—without Manchuria, it was a “potted plant,” without 
roots. And to secure Manchuria it was obviously necessary to 
ensure that North China was “friendly,” and then all of China, 
and Southeast Asia, and on to the Pacific war. Our claim to 
special rights in Asia is, on grounds of security or economic 
interest, far weaker than that of Japan. Japan, however, was 
dwarfed in wealth and power by a colossus across the seas, and 
we are not. 

Along such lines as these, one could develop an instructive 
sequel to Howard Zinn’s discussion of “Munich, dominoes, and 
containment.” 

What would be the consequences of a withdrawal of Ameri¬ 
can forces from Vietnam? If past events are any guide, the 
cessation of aggressive military action by the United States will 
lead to a disengagement of North Vietnamese units, as hap¬ 
pened, apparently, during the bombing pause in January 1966. 
It is noteworthy that no group in South Vietnam has advocated 
North Vietnamese involvement in an immediate political solu¬ 
tion, and the same North Vietnamese leadership that was will¬ 
ing, a decade ago, to arrange a modus vivendi with Diem 
