withdrawal are simply proposing that we eliminate this threat, 
as only we can do. 

It is hardly surprising that the peasantry refuses allegiance to 
a constituent assembly that could muster 3 votes out of 117 for 
the one land-reform measure that was introduced, or that even 
the residents of Saigon are less than enthusiastic about a gov¬ 
ernment so unbelievably corrupt that the secretary of industry 
in Ky’s cabinet seems to be the major supplier of drugs to the 
Vietcong—of course, after receiving a third of a million dollars 
in kickbacks from the American and West German suppliers. 14 
Nor is it obscure why the American government continues to 
use its military force to impose on the people of Vietnam the 
regime of the most corrupt, most reactionary elements in Viet¬ 
namese society. There is simply no one else who will do its 
bidding, and resist the overwhelming popular sentiment for 
peace and, no doubt, neutralism. The United States government 
has on occasion indicated that it would not leave if asked to do 
so “by a left-wing or even neutralist government that, in the 
U.S. view, did not reflect the true feelings of the South Vietna¬ 
mese people or military leaders.” 15 Furthermore, it will see to it 
that no such government will arise, and that no such opinions 
will be publicly expressed. Thus in the last few months, reports 
from South Vietnam indicate that once again a Buddhist at¬ 
tempt to establish a legal political organization were frustrated 
and the leaders arrested (Kahin memorandum, cited above, 
note 8). 

Jean Raffaelli, the one Western correspondent who has re¬ 
mained in North Vietnam, has observed that quite apart from 


230 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


any question of politics, there is a human element of grandeur 
in the resistance of the Vietnamese to the assault launched 
against them by the world's most advanced technology. In Le 
Monde, a North Vietnamese doctor “of international reputa¬ 
tion” is quoted as saying: 

... the Americans have demolished everything. All that we have 
built since 1954 is in ruins: hospitals, schools, factories, new 
dwellings. We have nothing more to lose, except for independence 
and liberty. But to safeguard these, believe me, we are ready to 
endure anything. 

In South Vietnam, the American attack has been far more 
severe, and direct report from its victims is lacking. But some 
statistics tell the story well enough. According to American 
sources, the Vietcong are “able to enlist an estimated 7,000 
recruits a month.” 16 Recently, an extensive propaganda barrage 
has enthusiastically proclaimed that in March 1967 there were 
5,557 defectors from the Vietcong, almost twice as many as in 
any previous month. Only the careful reader would have noted 
that of these “defectors” 630 were identified as military men and 
301 as political cadres, the rest being peasants, probably coming 
for a free meal. 17 Seven thousand new recruits and 630 defec¬ 
tors—these figures indicate graphically by what means the 
American war in Vietnam must be won. 

The preceding description is based on reports in early 1967. 
Rereading it in January 1968, I need hardly emphasize how 
little the situation has changed. The savage battering of the 
Vietnamese continues without pause; in scale, it is unique in the 
history of warfare. We learn that aerial bombardment alone 
exceeds 100 pounds of explosives per person, 12 tons of explo¬ 
sives per square mile, distributed almost equally between North 
and South Vietnam. Hundreds of thousands of acres have been 
subjected to defoliation, with what ultimate consequences no 

231 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


one knows. Refugees in South Vietnam are counted in the mil¬ 
lions. Why have they left their homes? . . the reason why the 
people are forced to abandon their villages and their homes is 
because, in most cases, practically all of the homes are com¬ 
pletely burned to the ground by the American forces. However, 
the people still try to cling to their scorched land, and are re¬ 
moved only by compulsion. . . .” 18 Literate Americans— 
those wdio have followed the w r ell-reported horror story of 
Ben Sue, for example—can supply the details for themselves. 19 
Numerous eyewitness reports have given the lie to the cynical 
pretense that our targets in North Vietnam are purely 
military, targets of “steel and concrete.” The chief editorial 
writer of Asahi Shimbun writes: “I myself walked around 
and inspected the bombed remains of schools, hospitals, 
churches, temples, market places, and other peaceful public 
facilities.” 20 Lee Lockwood, Harrison Salisbury, David 
Schoenbrun, and others have elaborated, for those who wish 
to know. It is no longer denied that antipersonnel weapons 
