this was the order) to kick and club passive, quiet people who 
refuse to move. The federal marshals, predictably, were very 
different. They reminded me of the police officers I had seen in 
a Jackson, Mississippi, jail several summers ago, who had 
laughed when an old man showed us a bloody homemade ban¬ 
dage on his leg and tried to describe to us how he had been 
beaten by the police. In Washington, the ones who got the 
worst of it at the hands of the marshals were the young boys 
and girls, particularly boys with long hair. Nothing seemed to 
bring out the marshals’ sadism more than the sight of a boy 
with long hair. Yet, although I witnessed some acts of violence 


373 


*= AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

by the marshals, their behavior largely seemed to range from 
indifference to petty nastiness. For example, we were kept in a 
police van for an hour or two with the doors closed and only a 
few air holes for ventilation—one can’t be too careful with such 
ferocious criminal types. 

In the prison dormitory and after my release I heard many 
stories, which I feel sure are authentic, of the courage of the 
young people, many of whom were quite frightened by the 
terrorism that began late at night after the TV cameramen and 
most of the press had left. They sat quietly hour after hour 
through the cold night; many were kicked and beaten and 
dragged across police lines (more “disorderly conduct”). I also 
heard stories, distressing ones, of provocation of the troops by the 
demonstrators—usually, it seems, those who were not in the front 
rows. Surely this was indefensible. Soldiers are unwitting instru¬ 
ments of terror; one does not blame or attack the club that is 
used to bludgeon someone to death. They are also human beings, 
with sensibilities to which one can perhaps appeal. There is in 
fact strong evidence that one soldier, perhaps three or four, re¬ 
fused to obey orders and was placed under arrest. The soldiers, 
after all, are in much the same position as the draft resisters. If 
they obey orders, they become brutalized by w T hat they do; if 
they do not, the personal consequences are severe. It is a situa¬ 
tion that deserves compassion, not abuse. But we should retain a 
sense of proportion in the matter. Everything that I saw or heard 
indicates that the demonstrators played only a small role in 
initiating the considerable violence that occurred. 

The argument that resistance to the war should remain 
strictly nonviolent seems to me overwhelming. As a tactic, vio¬ 
lence is absurd. No one can compete with the government in 
