refusal of the central government to “give any assistance in 
economic and financial questions, presumably because it has 
little sympathy with the work of a practical order which is 
being carried out in Catalonia” 82 —that is, collectivization. He 
“went on to recount that a Commission which went to Madrid 
to ask for credits to purchase war materials and raw materials, 
offering 1,000 million pesetas in securities lodged in the Bank of 
Spain, met with a blank refusal. It was sufficient that the new 
war industry in Catalonia was controlled by the workers of the 
C.N.T. for the Madrid Government to refuse any unconditional 
aid. Only in exchange for government control would they give 
financial assistance.” 83 

Broue and Temime take a rather similar position. Comment¬ 
ing on the charge of “incompetence” leveled against the col¬ 
lectivized industries, they point out that “one must not neglect 
the terrible burden of the war.” Despite this burden, they ob¬ 
serve, “new techniques of management and elimination of divi¬ 
dends had permitted a lowering of prices” and “mechanisation 
and rationalization, introduced in numerous enterprises . . . 
had considerably augmented production. The workers ac¬ 
cepted the enormous sacrifices with enthusiasm because, in 
most cases, they had the conviction that the factory belonged to 
them and that at last they were working for themselves and their 
class brothers. A truly new spirit had come over the economy of 
Spain with the concentration of scattered enterprises, the simpli- 


90 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


fication of commercial patterns, a significant structure of social 
projects for aged workers, children, disabled, sick and the per¬ 
sonnel in general” (pp. 150-51). The great weakness of the 
revolution, they argue, was the fact that it was not carried 
through to completion. In part this was because of the war; in 
part, a consequence of the policies of the central government. 
They too emphasize the refusal of the Madrid government, in 
the early stages of collectivization, to grant credits or supply 
funds to collectivized industry or agriculture—in the case of 
Catalonia, even when substantial guarantees were offered by 
the Catalonian government. Thus the collectivized enterprises 
were forced to exist on what assets had been seized at the time 
of the revolution. The control of gold and credit “permitted the 
government to restrict and prevent the function of collective 
enterprises at will” (p. 144). 

