Western sociologist sees in the rise of intellectuals to effective 
power the hope for a more humane and smoothly functioning 
society, in which problems can be solved by “piecemeal tech¬ 
nology.” Who has the sharper eye ? At least this much is plain: 
there are dangerous tendencies in the ideology of the welfare 
state intelligentsia who claim to possess the technique and un¬ 
derstanding required to manage our “postindustrial society” and 
to organize an international society dominated by American 
superpower. Many of these dangers are revealed, at a purely 
ideological level, in the study of the counterrevolutionary sub¬ 
ordination of scholarship. The dangers exist both insofar as the 
claim to knowledge is real and insofar as it is fraudulent. Insofar 
as the technique of management and control exists, it can be 
used to consolidate the authority of those who exercise it and to 
diminish spontaneous and free experimentation with new social 
forms, as it can limit the possibilities for reconstruction of soci¬ 
ety in the interests of those who are now, to a greater or lesser 
extent, dispossessed. Where the techniques fail, they will be 
supplemented by all of the methods of coercion that modern 
technology provides, to preserve order and stability. 

For a glimpse of what may lie ahead, consider the Godkin 
lectures of McGeorge Bundy, recently delivered at Harvard. 149 


12& 


^ - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

Bundy urges that more power be concentrated in the executive 
branch of the government, now “dangerously weak in relation 
to its present tasks.” That the powerful executive will act with 
justice and wisdom—this presumably needs no argument. As an 
example of the superior executive who should be attracted to 
government and given still greater power, Bundy cites Robert 
McNamara. Nothing could reveal more clearly the dangers in¬ 
herent in the “new society” than the role that McNamara’s Pen¬ 
tagon has played for the past half-dozen years. No doubt Mc¬ 
Namara succeeded in doing with utmost efficiency that which 
should not be done at all. No doubt he has shown an unparal¬ 
leled mastery of the logistics of coercion and repression, com¬ 
bined with the most astonishing inability to comprehend politi¬ 
cal and human factors. The efficiency of the Pentagon is no less 
remarkable than its pratfalls . 150 When understanding fails, 
there is always more force in reserve. As the “experiments in 
material and human resources control” collapse and “revolu¬ 
tionary development” grinds to a halt, we simply resort more 
openly to the Gestapo tactics that are barely concealed behind 
the fagade of “pacification .” 151 When American cities explode, 
we can expect the same. The technique of “limited warfare” 
translates neatly into a system of domestic repression—far more 
humane, as will quickly be explained, than massacring those 
who are unwilling to wait for the inevitable victory of the war 
on poverty. 

Why should a liberal intellectual be so persuaded of the vir¬ 
tues of a political system of four-year dictatorship ? The answer 
seems all too plain. 


126 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


Notes 

1. “Politics and the Morality of Scholarship,” in Max Black, ed., The 
Morality of Scholarship (Ithaca, N.Y., Cornell University Press, 
1967), pp. 59-3S. 

2. “The War and Its Effects—II,” Congressional Record , December 
13, 1967. 

3. Congressional Record , July 27, 1967. 

4. William A. Nighsvvonger, Rural Pacification in Vietnam (Praeger 
Special Studies; New York, Frederick A. Praeger, Inc., 1967)—one 
of a series of “specialized research monographs in U.S. and interna¬ 
tional economics and politics.” 

5. Ithiel de Sola Pool, “The Necessity for Social Scientists Doing 
Research for Governments,” Background , Vol. 10 (August 1966), p. 
111 . 

6. Max Ways writes in Fortune that “McNamara, his systems ana¬ 
lysts, and their computers are not only contributing to the practical 
effectiveness of U.S. action, but raising the moral level of policy by a 
more conscious and selective attention to the definition of its aims” 
(italics mine). Cited by Andrew Kopkind, “The Future-Planners,” 
New Republic, February 25, 1967, p. 23. Comment would be super¬ 
fluous. 

7. Daniel Bell, “Notes on the Post-Industrial Society: Part I,” The 
Public Interest , No. 6, 1967, pp. 24-35. 

8. Some of the dangers are noted by Richard Goodwin, in a review of 
Thomas Schelling’s Arms and Influence in the New Yorker , February 
