
The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


ing the precedent established by Great Britain and the United 
States; it was establishing its own Monroe Doctrine and realiz¬ 
ing its Manifest Destiny. It is revealing to study the American 
response to this claim. Hull professed to be shocked. In his view 
of the matter, the Monroe Doctrine, “as we interpret and apply 
it uniformly since 1823 only contemplates steps for our physical 
safety/’ whereas Japan is bent on aggression. 94 He deplored the 
“simplicity of mind that made it difficult for . . . [Japanese 
generals] ... to see why the United States, on the one hand, 
should assert leadership in the Western Hemisphere with the 
Monroe Doctrine and, on the other, want to interfere with 
Japan’s assuming leadership in Asia/’ and he asked Nomura, 
“Why can’t the Japanese Government educate the generals” to a 
more correct understanding of this fundamental distinction? 95 

American scholars were equally offended by the analogy. W. 
W. Willoughby, in a detailed analysis, concludes that no com¬ 
parison can be made between the Monroe Doctrine and Japan’s 
plans 96 The United States, he asserts, has never resorted to the 
Monroe Doctrine to demand “that it be given special commer¬ 
cial or other economic privileges in the other American States.” 
Rather, “it has exercised its powers of military intervention or of 
financial administration for the benefit of the peoples of the 
countries concerned or of those who have had just pecuniary 
claims against them.” He cites with approval the discussion by 
G. H. Blakeslee in Foreign Affairs , 97 which characterizes the 
main difference between the American and Japanese position in 
this way: 

The United States is a vast territory with a great population vis-a- 
vis a dozen Caribbean republics, each with a relatively small area 
and population. Japan, on the other hand, is a country with a 
relatively small area and population vis-a-vis the vast territory 
and great population of China. An attitude which therefore ap- 

205 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


pears natural for the United States to take toward the Caribbean 
States does not appear natural for Japan to take toward China. 

This contribution to the history of imperialist apologia at 
least has the merit of originality. To my knowledge, no one had 
previously argued that attempts by one nation to dominate an¬ 
other are proper to the extent that the victim is smaller and 
weaker than the power that is bent on subjugating it. However, 
this argument is perhaps surpassed in acuity by Blakeslee’s next 
explanation of the fundamental error in the Japanese analogy: 

The United States does not need to use military force to induce 
the Caribbean republics to permit American capital to find profit¬ 
able investment. The doors are voluntarily wide open. 

American willingness to submit to the people’s will in the 
Caribbean was, in fact, nicely illustrated in the fall of 1933, a 
few months after Blakeslee’s article appeared, when Ramon Grau 
San Martin came into pow r er in Cuba with a program that 
interrupted what Sumner Welles described as the attempt to 
secure “a practical monopoly of the Cuban market for American 
imports.” As Welles noted, this government was “highly prej¬ 
udicial to our interest . . . our own commercial and export 
interests cannot be revived under this government.” Conse¬ 
quently, Roosevelt refused to recognize the Grau government, 
and Welles commenced his intrigues (which he admitted were 
“anomalous”) with Batista, who was, in his judgment, “the only 
individual in Cuba today who represented authority. . . . This 
.. . had rallied to his support the very great majority of the com¬ 
mercial and financial interests in Cuba who are looking for 
protection” (Welles to Hull, October 4, 1933). The Grau gov¬ 
ernment soon fell, with the result that “the pre-1930 social and 
economic class structure was retained, and the important place 
in the Cuban economy held by foreign enterprises was not 
fundamentally disturbed.” 98 


206 


The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


But the basic inadequacy of the Japanese analogy, as Blakes- 
lee points out, is the difference in aims. The United States 

aims to help the backward Caribbean countries to establish and 
maintain conditions of stability and prosperity. The United States 
does not wish to seize territory, directly or indirectly, or to as¬ 
sume political or economic control. And when it has seemed 
necessary to intervene in some revolution-tossed land, it has 
effected the necessary reorganization and has then withdrawn. 

It is this benevolence of intent that the Japanese do not share. 
Consequently, their appeal to the precedent of American prac¬ 
