AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


amply reported in the press , 31 or on the significance of the fact 
that Koreans are eliminating NLF influence from Vietnamese 
villages, and not allowing the Vietnamese government cadres 
the leeway desired. 

Mitchell draws no policy conclusions from his study, but oth¬ 
ers have seen the point: recall the remarks of the moderate 
scholars on the dangers of social reform. Other scholars have 
carried the analysis much further. For example, Charles Wolf, 
senior economist of the RAND Corporation, discusses the mat¬ 
ter in a recent book . 32 Wolf considers two “theoretical models” 
for analyzing insurgency problems. The first is the approach of 
the hearts-and-minds school of counterinsurgency, which em¬ 
phasizes the importance of popular support. Wolf agrees that it 
is no doubt “a desirable goal” to win “popular allegiance to a 
government that is combating an insurgent movement,” but this 
objective, he argues, is not appropriate “as a conceptual frame¬ 
work for counterinsurgency programs.” His alternative ap¬ 
proach has as its “unifying theme” the concept of “influencing 
behavior , rather than attitudes.” Thus, “confiscation of chick¬ 
ens, razing of houses, or destruction of villages have a place in 
counterinsurgency efforts, but only if they are done for a strong 
reason: namely, to penalize those who have assisted the insur¬ 
gents. . . . whatever harshness is meted out by government 
forces [must be] unambiguously recognizable as deliberately 
imposed because of behavior by the population that contributes 
to the insurgent movement.” Furthermore, it must be noted that 
“policies that would increase rural income by raising food 
prices, or projects that would increase agricultural productivity 
through distribution of fertilizer or livestock, may be of nega¬ 
tive value during an insurgency . . . since they may actually 
facilitate guerrilla operations by increasing the availability of 
inputs that the guerrillas need.” More generally: “In setting up 


54 



Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


economic and social improvement programs, the crucial point is 
to connect such programs with the kind of population behavior 
the government wants to promote.” The principle is to reward 
the villages that cooperate and to provide penalties for the 
behavior that the government is trying to discourage. “At a 
