healthy “realpolitik point of view” that Irving Kristol so much 
admires. 

But, one may ask, why restrict ourselves to such indirect 
means as mass starvation? Why not bombing? No doubt this 
message is implicit in the remarks to the same committee of the 
Reverend R. J. de Jaegher, regent of the Institute of Far East¬ 
ern Studies, Seton Hall University, who explains that like all 
people who have lived under Communism, the North Vietna¬ 
mese “would be perfectly happy to be bombed to be free” (p. 
345). 

Of course, there must be those who support the Communists. 
But this is really a matter of small concern, as the Honorable 
Walter Robertson, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern 
Affairs from 1953 to 1959, points out in his testimony before the 
same committee. He assures us that “The Peiping regime . . . 
represents something less than 3 percent of the population” (p. 
402). 

Consider, then, how fortunate the Chinese Communist lead¬ 
ers are, compared to the leaders of the Vietcong, who, accord¬ 
ing to Arthur Goldberg, represent about “one-half of one per¬ 
cent of the population of South Vietnam,” that is, about one 
half the number of new Southern recruits for the Vietcong dur¬ 
ing 1965, if we can credit Pentagon statistics. 25 

In the face of such experts as these, the scientists and philos¬ 
ophers of whom Kristol speaks would clearly do well to con¬ 
tinue to draw their circles in the sand. 

Having settled the issue of the political irrelevance of the 
protest movement, Kristol turns to the question of what moti¬ 
vates it—more generally, what has made students and junior 
faculty “go left,” as he sees it, amid general prosperity and 


338 


The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


under liberal, welfare state administrations. This, he notes, “is a 
riddle to which no sociologist has as yet come up with an an¬ 
swer.” Since these young people are well off, have good futures, 
etc., their protest must be irrational. It must be the result of 
boredom, of too much security, or something of this sort. 

Other possibilities come to mind. It might be, for example, 
that as honest men the students and junior faculty are attempt¬ 
ing to find out the truth for themselves rather than ceding the 
responsibility to “experts” or to government; and it might be 
that they react with indignation to what they discover. These 
possibilities Kristol does not reject. They are simply unthink¬ 
able, unworthy of consideration. More accurately, these possi¬ 
bilities are inexpressible; the categories in which they are 
formulated (honesty, indignation) simply do not exist for the 
tough-minded social scientist. 

In this implicit disparagement of traditional intellectual val¬ 
ues, Kristol reflects attitudes that are fairly widespread in aca¬ 
demic circles. I do not doubt that these attitudes are in part a 
consequence of the desperate attempt of the social and behav¬ 
ioral sciences to imitate the surface features of sciences that 
really have significant intellectual content. But they have other 
sources as well. Anyone can be a moral individual, concerned 
with human rights and problems; but only a college professor, a 
trained expert, can solve technical problems by “sophisticated” 
methods. Ergo, it is only problems of the latter sort that are 
important or real. Responsible, nonideological experts will give 
advice on tactical questions; irresponsible “ideological types” 
will “harangue” about principle and trouble themselves over 
moral issues and human rights, or over the traditional problems 
of man and society, concerning which “social and behavioral 
science” have nothing to offer beyond trivialities. Obviously, 
these emotional, ideological types are irrational, since, being 


339 


if - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

well off and having power in their grasp, they shouldn’t worry 
about such matters. 

At times this pseudoscientific posing reaches levels that are 
almost pathological. Consider the phenomenon of Herman 
Kahn, for example. Kahn has been both denounced as immoral 
and lauded for his courage. By people who should know better, 
his On Thermonuclear War has been described “without quali¬ 
fication . . . [as] . . . one of the great works of our time” (Stuart 
Hughes). The fact of the matter is that this is surely one of the 
emptiest works of our time, as can be seen by applying to it the 
intellectual standards of any existing discipline, by tracing some 
of its “well-documented conclusions” to the “objective studies” 
from which they derive, and by following the line of argument, 
where detectable. Kahn proposes no theories, no explanations, 
no empirical assumptions that can be tested against their conse¬ 
