ternatives satisfy their human needs—including the human need 
to show compassion, to encourage and to assist those who seek to 
raise themselves from the misery and degradation that our so¬ 
ciety has helped to impose and now seeks to perpetuate. 

It would be criminal folly to fail to act when there are oppor¬ 
tunities to move towards these goals, or to act in such a way as 
to make them still more distant than they are today. It is not 
easy to find a way to steer between these dangers. There is no 
doubt that in the recent past, the error has consistently been on 
the side of caution and restraint, fear and moral blindness. But 
one must bear in mind, as tensions mount, that the opposite error 
is no less serious. It is quite easy to design tactics that will help 
to consolidate the latent forces of a potential American fascism. 
To mention just one obvious example, verbal and physical abuse 
of the police, however great the provocation, can have only this 
effect. Such tactics may seem “radical” and, in a narrow sense, 
justified by the magnitude of the infamy and evil that they seek 
to overcome. They are not. 

In fact, it is senseless to speak—as many now do—of tactics 
and actions as being “radical,” “liberal,” “conservative,” or “re¬ 
actionary.” In itself, an action cannot be placed on a political 


398 



Supplement to “On Resistance’’ 


dimension at all. It may be successful or unsuccessful in achiev¬ 
ing an end that can be described in political terms. But it is use¬ 
ful to remember that the same tactics that one man may propose 
with high conscience and deep commitment to radical social 
change may also be pressed by a well-placed police spy, bent on 
destroying such a movement and increasing popular support for 
the forces of repression. Consider the Reichstag fire, to return to 
a day that is less remote than one would wish. Or consider the act 
of a seventeen-year-old Jewish refugee from Poland just thirty 
years ago—of Herschel Grynszpan, who assassinated a German 
official in Paris in November 1938. It is difficult to condemn this 
desperate act, which set off violent pogroms throughout Germany 
and helped entrench more deeply the Nazi regime of terror; but 
the victims of Nazi terror would offer no thanks to Herschel 
Grynszpan. We must not abandon the victims of American power, 
or play games with their fate. We must not consent to have the 
same repression imposed on still further helpless victims or the 
same blind fury unleashed against them. Acts that seem perfectly 
