

172 



The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


tributory cause to the crisis that was soon to erupt. 

In later years, the Japanese came to feel, with much justice, 
that they had been hoodwinked more generally in the diplo¬ 
matic arrangements of the early 1920s, which “embodied the 
idea that the Far East is essentially a place for the commercial 
and financial activities of the Western peoples; and . . . empha¬ 
sized the importance of placing the signatory powers on an 
equal footing, thus ignoring the desirability of providing special 
relations between particular countries, especially between 
Japan and China/’ 15 A typical Japanese view of the situation 
was expressed by a delegate to the 1925 conference of the Insti¬ 
tute of Pacific Relations (IPR): “Just as [Japan] was getting 
really skillful at the game of the grab, the other Powers, most of 
whom had all they wanted anyway, suddenly had an excess of 
virtue and called the game off.” 16 A decade later, a delegate to 
the 1936 IPR conference was to reiterate: 

The Japanese feel that Western countries are unfair in imposing 
the status quo on Japan and calling it “peace.” Their whole 
conception of diplomatic machinery and collective security is that 
it is simply a means to maintain that sort of peace, and to that 
degree the Japanese people are against it. This doesn’t mean that 
Japan would not participate in collective security if some ma¬ 
chinery can be devised which provides for “peaceful change.” . . . 
Japan has a legitimate desire to expand. What are the means by 
which a nation can legitimately expand? Imperialistic advances 
are apparently out of date, but this is not understood by the 
Japanese people. The average reasoning of the Japanese people is 
that Great Britain and the other Western powers have done it, so 
why shouldn’t we? The problem is not so much to determine the 
aggressor as to provide ample opportunities for the necessary 
expansion peacefully. 17 

Through the mid-1920s the Japanese were, generally, the 
most sympathetic of the imperialist powers to the Kuomintang 
in its attempt to unify China. In 1927, Chiang Kai-shek stated 


173 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


that the Japanese policy differed from the “oppressive” attitude 
of Britain and the United States, and Eugene Ch’en, then a 
high Kuomintang official, contrasted Japan's nonparticipation in 
the imperialist bombardment of Nanking to the “cruelty in¬ 
herent in the Western civilization”; this “indicated Japan’s 
friendship for China.” The goal of Japanese diplomacy was to 
strengthen the anti-Communist elements in the Kuomintang 
and, at the same time, to support the rule of the warlord Chang 
Tso-lin over an at least semi-independent Manchuria. At the 
time, this seemed not totally unreasonable, although the legal 
position of Japan was insecure and this policy was sure to come 
into conflict with Chinese nationalism. According to one author¬ 
ity: 

As of 1927 Manchuria was politically identifiable with China 
only insofar as its overlord, Chang Tso-lin, was also commander- 
in-chief of the anti-Kuomintang coalition controlling Peking. But 
Chang’s economic and military base in the Three Eastern Prov¬ 
inces was entirely distinct from China, and in the past he had 
occasionally proclaimed Manchuria’s independence. 18 

To the extent that this assessment is accurate, Japanese diplo¬ 
macy was not unrealistic in aiming to prevent the growing na¬ 
tionalist movement in China from overwhelming Manchuria,, 
and at the same time to curb the ambitions of the Manchurian 
warlord to take over all of China. This remained, in essence, the 
goal of the Japanese civilian governments even through the 
“Manchurian incident” of 1931-1932. 

By 1931, it was becoming fairly clear that the relatively con¬ 
ciliatory diplomacy of the 1920s was unlikely to secure the 
“rights and interests” regarded as essential for Japan’s continued 
development. The effects of the great depression were immedi¬ 
ate and severe (see below). The London Treaty had failed to 
provide Japan with military security vis a vis the other imperial- 


174 



The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 

