
261 


- AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

Munich analogy there is only one plausible contender for the 
role of Hitler. And if China or Russia do involve themselves in 
World War III over Vietnam, we can be sure that the memory 
of Munich will play an important role in their calculations. 72 
Arnold Toynbee has put the matter quite succinctly: “The Pres¬ 
ident manifestly feels that he is speaking with Churchill’s voice 
—the Churchill of 1940—but to the ears of peoples who have 
suffered from Western domination in the past, his voice sounds 
like the Kaiser’s and like Hitler’s.” 

There is surely no greater irony than the demand that to 
ensure world peace, the United States must develop a strategy 
for the containment of China. China is surrounded by American 
missiles and huge military bases supporting an army eight thou¬ 
sand miles from home. It is subject to regular bombardment 
from an island that is barely off the mainland, not to speak of 
overflights and commando raids, all under the protection of the 
Seventh Fleet, admittedly intervening in a civil war. For two 
years American planes have been bombing the only railroad 
connecting southwestern China, with its industrial center of 
Kunming, to the rest of the country—it happens to pass near 
Hanoi. Yet even a Roger Hilsman, one of the sanest voices 
commenting on Asian affairs, can speak of the “formidable 
threat” posed by Communist China, and can conclude that “it 
certainly served no useful purpose for the United States to re¬ 
ward aggression by recognizing Communist China or by encour¬ 
aging their being seated in the U.N.” 73 

It is illuminating to examine in detail Hilsman’s demonstra¬ 
tion of “Chinese belligerence.” The primary example of “Chi¬ 
nese aggression” (apart from “aggression” in Korea) is the sup¬ 
port for the “crude and unsophisticated” insurrections in 
“Burma, Thailand, Malaya, the Philippines, and French Indo¬ 
china,” which the Chinese succeeded in putting “on a more 


262 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


effective, politically sophisticated course” (p. 285). The history 
of “Chinese belligerence,” of the aggression which we must be 
