ceivable that at some future time a powerful China may be expan¬ 
sionist. We may speculate about such possibilities if we wish, but it is 
American aggressiveness that is the central fact of current politics. 

30. W. S. Churchill, The Second World War, Vol. 5, Closing the Ring 
(Boston, Houghton Mifflin Company, 1951), p. 382. 

31. United States Policy Toward Asia, p. 104. See note 15. 

32. Ibid., p. 105. 

33. Douglas Pike, op. cit., p. 110. This book, written by a foreign 
service officer working at the Center for International Studies, MIT, 
poses a contrast between our side, which sympathizes with “the usual 
revolutionary stirrings . . . around the world because they reflect 
inadequate living standards or oppressive and corrupt governments,” 
and the backers of “revolutionary guerrilla warfare,” which “opposes 
the aspirations of people while apparently furthering them, manipu¬ 
lates the individual by persuading him to manipulate himself.” Revo¬ 
lutionary guerrilla warfare is “an imported product, revolution from 
the outside” (other examples besides the Vietcong are “Stalin’s ex¬ 
portation of armed revolution,” the Haganah in Palestine, and the 
Irish Republican Army—see pp. 32-33). The Vietcong could not be an 
indigenous movement since it has “a social construction program of 
such scope and ambition that of necessity it must have been created in 
Hanoi” (p. 76—but on pp. 77-79 we read that “organizational activity 
had gone on intensively and systematically for several years” before 
the Lao Dong party in Hanoi had made its decision “to begin building 
an organization”). On p. 80 we find that “such an effort had to be the 
child of the North,” even though elsewhere we read of the prominent 
role of the Cao Dai (p. 74), “the first major social group to begin 
actively opposing the Diem government” (p. 222), and of the Hoa 

365 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


Hao sect, “another early and major participant in the NLF” (p. 69)* 
Pike takes it as proof of Communist duplicity that in the South the 
party insisted it was “Marxist-Leninist,” thus “indicating philosophic 
but not political allegiance,” whereas in the North it described itself as 
a “Marxist-Leninist organization,” thus “indicating that it was in the 
main-stream of the world-wide Communist movement” (p. 150). And 
so on. Also revealing is the contempt for “Cinderella and all the other 
fools [who] could still believe there was magic in the mature world if 
one mumbled the secret incantation: solidarity, union, concord”; for 
the “gullible, misled people” who were “turning the countryside into a 
bedlam, toppling one Saigon government after another, confounding 
the Americans”; for the “mighty force of people” who in their mind¬ 
less innocence thought that “the meek, at last, were to inherit the 
earth,” that “riches would be theirs and all in the name of justice and 
virtue.” One can appreciate the chagrin with which a sophisticated 
Western political scientist must view this “sad and awesome specta¬ 
cle.” 

34. Lacouture, op. cit., p. 188. The same military spokesman goes on, 
ominously, to say that this is the problem confronting us throughout 
Asia, Africa, and Latin America, and that we must find the “proper 
response.” 

35. Charles Mohr, New York Times, February 11, 1966. Italics 
mine. 

36. New York Times, February 18, 1966. 

37. William Bundy, “The United States and Asia,” in Alastair 
Buchan, ed., China and the Peace of Asia (New York, Frederick A. 
Praeger, Inc., 1965), pp. 29-30. 

38. Op. cit., p. 80. 

39. United States Policy Toward Asia, pp. 191-201, passim. 

40. An American Policy in Asia, p. 10. 

41. United States Policy Toward Asia, p. 128. 

42. Lindholm, op. cit., p. 322. 


366 



Several weeks after the demonstrations in Washington, I am 
still trying to sort out my impressions of a week whose quality is 
difficult to capture or express. Perhaps some personal reflec¬ 
tions may be useful to others who share my instinctive distaste 
for activism, but who find themselves edging towards an un¬ 
wanted but almost inevitable crisis. 

This article first appeared in the New York Review of Books, December 7, 
1967. It is reprinted with a few revisions. The demonstrations referred to took 
place at the Justice Department and the Pentagon, on the weekend of October 
19-21, 1967. The draft card turn-in at the Justice Department was one of the 
events that led to the sentencing of Dr. Benjamin Spock, Rev. William Sloane 
