and machinery when India has a tested capacity to meet some 
of their requirements. They have insisted on importing liquid 
ammonia, a basic raw material, rather than using indigenous 
naphtha which is abundantly available. They have laid down 
restrictions about pricing, distribution, profits, and management 
control.” The Indian reaction, I have already cited (see page 
336). 

In such ways as these, we help India develop towards an 
open society, one which, in Walt Rostow’s words, has a proper 
understanding of “the core of the American ideology,” namely, 
“the sanctity of the individual in relation to the state.” And in 
this way, too, w T e refute the simpleminded view of those Asians 
w T ho, to continue with Rostow’s phrasing, “believe or half- 
believe that the West has been driven to create and then to 
cling to its imperial holdings by the inevitable workings of capi¬ 
talist economies.” 40 

In fact, a major postwar scandal is developing in India as the 
United States, cynically capitalizing on India’s current torture, 
applies its economic power to implement India’s “drift from 
socialism to pragmatism.” 

In pursuing the aim of helping other countries to progress 
towards open societies, with no thought of territorial aggran¬ 
dizement, we are breaking no new ground. Hans Morgenthau 
has aptly described our traditional policy towards China as one 
of favoring “what you might call freedom of competition with 
regard to the exploitation of China.” 41 In fact, few imperialist 
powers have had explicit territorial ambitions. Thus in 1784, the 
British Parliament announced that “to pursue schemes of con¬ 
quest and extension of dominion in India are measures repug- 


356 



The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


nant to the wish, honor, and policy of this nation.” Shortly after, 
the conquest of India was in full swing. A century later, Britain 
announced its intentions in Egypt under the slogan “Interven¬ 
tion, Reform, Withdrawal.” It is unnecessary to comment on 
which parts of this promise were fulfilled, within the next half 
century. In 1936, on the eve of hostilities in North China, the 
Japanese stated their Basic Principles of National Policy. These 
included the use of moderate and peaceful means to extend her 
strength, to promote social and economic development, to erad¬ 
