constituency.” Although this “free election . . . will still leave 
unrepresented those who are fighting under the banner of the 
South Vietnam National Liberation Front and those whose 
candidates were not permitted to stand in the elections,” we 
must, after all, understand that no institution in the real world 
can be perfect. The important thing, according to Sacks, is that 
for the first time since the fall of Diem, there will be elections 
that are not seen by the government in power simply “as a 


45 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


means of legitimating the power they already had, using the 
governmental machinery to underwrite themselves.” Putting 
aside the remarkable naivete regarding the forthcoming elec¬ 
tions, what is striking is the implicit assumption that we have a 
right to continue our efforts to restructure the South Vietnamese 
government, in the interests of what we determine to be Viet¬ 
namese nationalism. In just the same way, the officers of the 
Kwantung Army sought to support “genuine Manchurian na¬ 
tionalism,” thirty-five years ago. 

To understand more fully what is implied by the judgment 
that we must defend the “nationalists” against the “Commu¬ 
nists,” we can turn again to Pike’s interesting study. The nation¬ 
alist groups mentioned by Sacks are the VNQDD and the Dai 
Viet. The former, after its virtual destruction by the French, 
was revived by the Chinese Nationalists in 1942. “It supported 
itself through banditry. It executed traitors with a great deal of 
publicity, and its violent acts in general were carefully con¬ 
ceived for their psychological value.” Returning to Vietnam 
“with the occupying Chinese forces following World War II,” it 
“was of some importance until mid-1946, when it was purged 
by the Vietminh.” “The VNQDD never was a mass political 
party in the Western sense. At its peak of influence it num¬ 
bered, by estimates of its own leaders, less than 1,500 persons. 
Nor was it ever particularly strong in either Central or South 
Vietnam. It had no formal structure and held no conventions or 
assemblies.” As to the Dai Viet, “Dai Viet membership included 
leading Vietnamese figures and governmental officials who 
viewed Japan as a suitable model for Vietnam [N. B. fascist 
Japan]. The organization never made any particular obeisance 
either to democracy or to the rank-and-file Vietnamese. It prob¬ 
ably never numbered more than 1,000 members and did not 
consider itself a mass-based organization. It turned away from 


46 




Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


Western liberalism, although its economic orientation was basi¬ 
cally socialist, in favor of authoritarianism and blind obedi¬ 
ence.” During World War II, “it was at all times strongly pro- 
Japanese.” 

In contrast to these genuine nationalists, we have the Viet- 
minh, whose “war was anticolonial, clearly nationalistic, and 
concerned all Vietnamese,” and the NLF, which regarded the 
rural Vietnamese not “simply as a pawn in a power struggle but 
as the active element in the thrust,” which “maintained that its 
contest with the GVN and the United States should be fought 
out at a political level and that the use of massed military might 
was in itself illegitimate,” until forced by the Americans and the 
GVN “to use counterforce to survive.” In its internal documents 
as well as its public pronouncements the NLF insisted, from its 
earliest days, that its goal must be to “set up a democratic 
national coalition administration in South Vietnam; realize in¬ 
dependence, democratic freedoms, and improvement of the 
people’s living conditions; safeguard peace; and achieve na¬ 
tional reunification on the basis of independence and democ¬ 
racy.” “Aside from the NLF there has never been a truly mass- 
based political party in South Vietnam.” It organized “the rural 
population through the instrument of self-control—victory by 
means of the organizational weapon,” setting up a variety of 
self-help “functional liberation associations” based on “associa- 
tional discipline” coupled with “the right of freedom of discus¬ 
sion and secret vote at association meetings,” and generating 
“a sense of community, first, by developing a pattern of political 
thought and behavior appropriate to the social problems of the 
rural Vietnamese village in the midst of sharp social change 
and, second, by providing a basis for group action that allowed 
the individual villager to see that his own efforts could have 
meaning and effect” (obviously, a skilled and treacherous 


47 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


