ertheless, the limited information that we have about popular 
movements in Asia, specifically, suggests certain similar features 
that deserve much more serious and sympathetic study than 
they have so far received. 56 Inadequate information makes it 
hazardous to try to develop any such parallel, but I think it is 
quite possible to note long-standing tendencies in the response 
of liberal as well as Communist intellectuals to such mass move¬ 
ments. 

As I have already remarked, the Spanish Civil War is not 
only one of the critical events of modern history but one of the 
most intensively studied as well. Yet there are surprising gaps. 
During the months following the Franco insurrection in July 
1936, a social revolution of unprecedented scope took place 
throughout much of Spain. It had no “revolutionary vanguard” 
and appears to have been largely spontaneous, involving masses 
of urban and rural laborers in a radical transformation of social 
and economic conditions that persisted, with remarkable suc¬ 
cess, until it was crushed by force. This predominantly anar¬ 
chist revolution and the massive social transformation to which it 
gave rise are treated, in recent historical studies, as a kind of 
aberration, a nuisance that stood in the way of successful prose¬ 
cution of the war to save the bourgeois regime from the Franco 
rebellion. Many historians would probably agree with Eric 
Hobsbawm 57 that the failure of social revolution in Spain “was 
due to the anarchists,” that anarchism was “a disaster,” a kind of 


76 



Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


“moral gymnastics” with no “concrete results,” at best “a pro¬ 
foundly moving spectacle for the student of popular religion.” 
The most extensive historical study of the anarchist revolu¬ 
tion 58 is relatively inaccessible, and neither its author, now liv¬ 
ing in southern France, nor the many refugees who will never 
write memoirs but who might provide invaluable personal tes¬ 
timony have been consulted, apparently, by writers of the 
major historical works. 59 The one published collection of doc¬ 
uments dealing with collectivization 60 has been published only 
by an anarchist press and hence is barely accessible to the 
general reader, and has also rarely been consulted—it does not, 
for example, appear in Jackson’s bibliography, though Jackson’s 
account is intended to be a social and political, not merely a 
military, history. In fact, this astonishing social upheaval seems 
to have largely passed from memory. The drama and pathos of 
the Spanish Civil War have by no means faded; witness the 
impact a few years ago of the film To Die in Madrid. Yet in this 
film (as Daniel Guerin points out) one finds no reference to the 
popular revolution that had transformed much of Spanish society. 

I will be concerned here with the events of 1936—1937, 61 and 
with one particular aspect of the complex struggle involving 
Franco Nationalists, Republicans (including the Communist 
party), anarchists, and socialist workers’ groups. The Franco 
insurrection in July 1936 came against a background of several 
months of strikes, expropriations, and battles between peasants 
and Civil Guards. The left-wing Socialist leader Largo Cabal¬ 
lero had demanded in June that the workers be armed, but was 
refused by Azana. When the coup came, the Republican gov¬ 
ernment was paralyzed. Workers armed themselves in Madrid 
and Barcelona, robbing government armories and even ships in 
the harbor, and put down the insurrection while the govern¬ 
ment vacillated, torn between the twin dangers of submitting to 


77 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


Franco and arming the working classes. In large areas of Spain 
effective authority passed into the hands of the anarchist and 
socialist workers who had played a substantial, generally domi¬ 
nant role in putting down the insurrection. 

The next few months have frequently been described as a 
period of “dual power.” In Barcelona industry and commerce 
were largely collectivized, and a wave of collectivization spread 
through rural areas, as well as towns and villages, in Aragon, 
Castile, and the Levant, and to a lesser but still significant 
extent in many parts of Catalonia, Asturias, Estremadura, and 
Andalusia. Military power was exercised by defense commit¬ 
tees; social and economic organization took many forms, fol¬ 
lowing in main outlines the program of the Saragossa Congress 
of the anarchist CNT in May 1936. The revolution was “apoliti¬ 
cal,” in the sense that its organs of power and administration 
remained separate from the central Republican government 
and, even after several anarchist leaders entered the government 
in the autumn of 1936, continued to function fairly independ¬ 
ently until the revolution was finally crushed between the 
fascist and Communist-led Republican forces. The success of 
collectivization of industry and commerce in Barcelona im¬ 
pressed even highly unsympathetic observers such as Borkenau. 
The scale of rural collectivization is indicated by these data 
