took shape over the past dozen years, on what page of history 
do we find our proper place? Only the most insensible can 
escape these questions. I want to return to them, later on, after 


324 


The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


a few scattered remarks about the responsibility of intellectuals 
and how, in practice, they go about meeting this responsibility 
in the mid-1960s. 

It is the responsibility of intellectuals to speak the truth and 
to expose lies. This, at least, may seem enough of a truism to 
pass without comment. Not so, however. For the modern intel¬ 
lectual, it is not at all obvious. Thus we have Martin Heidegger 
writing, in a pro-Hitler declaration of 1933, that “truth is the 
revelation of that which makes a people certain, clear, and 
strong in its action and knowledge”; it is only this kind of 
“truth” that one has a responsibility to speak. Americans tend to 
be more forthright. When Arthur Schlesinger was asked by the 
New York Times , in November 1965, to explain the contradic¬ 
tion between his published account of the Bay of Pigs incident 
and the story he had given the press at the time of the attack, 
he simply remarked that he had lied; and a few days later, he 
went on to compliment the Times for also having suppressed 
information on the planned invasion, in “the national interest,” 
as this was defined by the group of arrogant and deluded men 
of whom Schlesinger gives such a flattering portrait in his re¬ 
cent account of the Kennedy administration. It is of no particu¬ 
lar interest that one man is quite happy to lie in behalf of a 
cause which he knows to be unjust; but it is significant that such 
events provoke so little response in the intellectual community 
—no feeling, for example, that there is something strange in the 
offer of a major chair in humanities to a historian who feels it to 
be his duty to persuade the world that an American-sponsored 
invasion of a nearby country is nothing of the sort. And what of 
the incredible sequence of lies on the part of our government 
and its spokesmen concerning such matters as negotiations in 
Vietnam? The facts are known to all who care to know. The 
press, foreign and domestic, has presented documentation to 


325 


*= AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 
