by Maruyama, in his analysis of the “theory and psychology of ultra¬ 
nationalism”: “Acts of benevolence could coexist with atrocities, and 
the perpetrators were not aware of any contradiction. Here is revealed 
the phenomenon in which morality is subtly blended with power” {op. 
cit., p. 11). Again, the reader will have no difficulty in supplying 
contemporary examples. 

83. Lee, op. cit., pp. 307 f. 

84. Secret Report of the Office of Information of the Government of 
Manchukuo, April 1939, entitled: “Pacification Activities in the 
Communist Bandit Area (Personal Reflections)” (Lee, op. cit., pp. 
217 f.). 

85. “Civilian Loyalties,” in Wilson C. McWilliams, ed., Garrisons and 
Governments (San Francisco, Chandler Publishing Co., 1967), pp. 86-87. 

86. Shizuo Maruyama, “The Other War in Vietnam: The Revolution¬ 
ary Development Program,” Japan Quarterly, Vol. 14 (July-Septem- 


218 


The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


ber 1967), pp. 297-303. The author, a Southeast Asian specialist and 
editorial writer for Asahi Shimbun, notes the similarity to earlier 
Japanese efforts, but feels that the prospects for the American pro¬ 
gram are dim for a number of reasons, among them the following: 

. . the wounds inflicted on Nature, so ruthlessly destroyed for this, are 
too brutal to see. Beautiful grasslands, the verdant forests and the 
rich crops have all been burned by flame throwers, napalm bombs and 
chemical defoliants. The great earth has been gouged and dug over. 
The ugly land, no longer green, has lost its power to attract people and 
to stir deep in the hearts of people a love for their birthplace and their 
motherland.” There is, he feels, little chance that revolutionary devel¬ 
opment will succeed “when Nature has been turned into a scorched 
earth and the system and the traditions born of a race of people have 
been destroyed.” 

87. Lu, op. cit., p. 67. 

88. Cf. Nobutaka Ike, ed., Japan’s Decision for War: Records of the 
1941 Policy Conferences (Stanford, Calif., Stanford University Press* 
1967), p. 11. 

89. The timing of these events is given in this order in Lu, op. cit., p. 
