are so fragmentary that it would no doubt be foolhardy to attempt a 
general evaluation. Still, all the reports I have been able to study 
suggest that insofar as real successes were achieved in the several 
stages of land reform, mutual aid, collectivization, and formation of 
communes, they were traceable in large part to the complex interac¬ 
tion of the Communist party cadres and the gradually evolving peas¬ 
ant associations, a relation which seems to stray far from the Leninist 
model of organization. This is particularly evident in William Hinton’s 
magnificent study Fanshen (New York, Monthly Review Press, 
1966), which is unparalleled, to my knowledge, as an analysis of a 
moment of profound revolutionary change. What seems to me particu¬ 
larly striking in his account of the early stages of revolution in one 
Chinese village is not only the extent to which party cadres submitted 
themselves to popular control, but also, and more significant, the ways 
in which exercise of control over steps of the revolutionary process 
was a factor in developing the consciousness and insight of those who 
took part in the revolution, not only from a political and social point 
of view, but also with respect to the human relationships that were 
created. It is interesting, in this connection, to note the strong populist 
element in early Chinese Marxism. For some very illuminating ob¬ 
servations about this general matter, see Maurice Meisner, Li Ta-chao 
and the Origins of Chinese Marxism (Cambridge, Mass., Harvard 
University Press, 1967). 

I am not suggesting that the anarchist revolution in Spain—with its 

137 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


background of more than thirty years of education and struggle—is 
being relived in Asia, but rather that the spontaneous and voluntary 
elements in popular mass movements have probably been seriously 
misunderstood because of the instinctive antipathy towards such 
phenomena among intellectuals, and more recently, because of the 
insistence on interpreting them in terms of Cold War mythology. 

57. “The Spanish Background,” New Left Review, No. 40 (November- 
December 1966), pp. 85-90. 

58. Jose Peirats, La C.N.T. en la revolucion espanola (Toulouse, 
Ediciones C.N.T., 1951-52), 3 vols. Jackson makes one passing refer¬ 
ence to it. Peirats has since published a general history of the period, 
Los anarquistas en la crisis politka espanola (Buenos Aires, Editorial 
Alfa-Argentina, 1964). This highly informative book should certainly 
be made available to an English-speaking audience. 

59. An exception to the rather general failure to deal with the an¬ 
archist revolution is Hugh Thomas' “Anarchist Agrarian Collectives 
in the Spanish Civil War,” in Martin Gilbert, ed., A Century of Con¬ 
flict, 1850-1950: Essays for A. J. P. Taylor (New York, Atheneum 
Publishers, 1967), pp. 245-63. See note 106 below for some discus¬ 
sion. There is also much useful information in what to my mind is the 
best general history of the Civil War, La Revolution et la guerre 
d'Espagne, by Pierre Broue and Emile Temime (Paris, Les Editions de 
Minuit, 1961). A concise and informative recent account is contained 
in Daniel Guerin, UAnarchisme (Paris, Gallimard, 1965). In his ex¬ 
tensive study, The Spa?iish Civil War (New York, Harper & Row, 
Publishers, 1961; paperback ed. 1963), Hugh Thomas barely refers to 
the popular revolution, and some of the major events are not men¬ 
tioned at all—see, for example, note 97 below. 

60. Collectivisations: Voeuvre constructive de la Revolution espag- 
nole, 2nd ed. (Toulouse, Editions C.N.T., 1965). The first edition was 
published in Barcelona (Editions C.N.T.-F.A.I., 1937). There is an 
excellent and sympathetic summary by the Marxist scholar Karl 
Korsch, “Collectivization in Spain,” in Living Marxism , Vol. 4 (April 
1939), pp. 179-82. In the same issue (pp. 170-71), the liberal-Com- 
munist reaction to the Spanish Civil War is summarized succinctly, 
and I believe accurately, as follows: “With their empty chatter as to 
the wonders of Bolshevik discipline, the geniality of Caballero, and the 
passions of the Pasionaria, the ‘modern liberals' merely covered up 
their real desire for the destruction of all revolutionary possibilities in 


138 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


the Civil War, and their preparation for the possible war over the 
Spanish issue in the interest of their diverse fatherlands . . . what was 
truly revolutionary in the Spanish Civil War resulted from the direct 
actions of the workers and pauperized peasants, and not because of a 
specific form of labor organization nor an especially gifted leader¬ 
ship.” I think that the record bears out this analysis, and I also think 
that it is this fact that accounts for the distaste for the revolutionary 
phase of the Civil War and its neglect in historical scholarship. 

61. An illuminating eyewitness account of this period is that of Franz 
Borkenau, The Spanish Cockpit (1938; reprinted Ann Arbor, Univer¬ 
sity of Michigan Press, 1963). 

62. Figures from Guerin, UAnarchisme, p. 154. 

