siderable social success” and must have had strong popular support, but he 
is more doubtful about their economic viability. His suggestion that 
“Communist pressure on the collectives may have given them the nec¬ 
essary urge to survive” seems quite unwarranted, as does his sugges¬ 
tion that “the very existence of the war . . . may have been responsible 
for some of the success the collectives had.” On the contrary, their 


150 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


success and spontaneous creation throughout Republican Spain sug¬ 
gest that they answered to deeply felt popular sentiments, and both the 
war and Communist pressure appear to have been highly disruptive 
factors—ultimately, of course, destructive factors. 

Other dubious conclusions are that “in respect of redistribution of 
wealth, anarchist collectives were hardly much improvement over 
capitalism” since “no effective way of limiting consumption in richer 
collectives was devised to help poorer ones,” and that there was no 
possibility of developing large-scale planning. On the contrary, Bol- 
loten {op. cit.y pp. 176-79) points out that “In order to remedy the 
defects of collectivization, as well as to iron out discrepancies in the 
living standards of the workers in flourishing and impoverished enter¬ 
prises, the Anarchosyndicalists, although rootedly opposed to nation¬ 
alization, advocated the centralization—or, socialization, as they 
called it—under trade union control, of entire branches of produc¬ 
tion.” He mentions a number of examples of partial socialization that 
had some success, citing as the major difficulty that prevented still 
greater progress the insistence of the Communist party and the UGT 
leadership—though apparently not all of the rank-and-file members of 
the UGT—on government ownership and control. According to Rich¬ 
ards {op. cit ., p. 82): “In June, 1937 ... a National Plenum of 
Regional Federations of Peasants was held in Valencia to discuss the 
formation of a National Federation of Peasants for the co-ordination 
and extension of the collectivist movement and also to ensure an 
equitable distribution of the produce of the land, not only between the 
collectives but for the whole country. Again in Castille in October 
1937, a merging of the 100,000 members of the Regional Federation 
of Peasants and the 13,000 members in the food distributive trades 
took place. It represented a logical step in ensuring better co-ordina¬ 
tion, and was accepted for the whole of Spain at the National Con¬ 
gress of Collectives held in Valencia in November 1937.” Still other 
plans were under consideration for regional and national coordination 
—see, for example, D. A. de Santillan, After the Revolution (New 
York, Greenberg Publisher, Inc., 1937), for some ideas. 

Thomas feels that collectives could not have survived more than “a 
few years while primitive misery was being overcome.” I see nothing 
in his data to support this conclusion. The Palestinian experience has 
shown that collectives can remain both a social and an economic 
success over a long period. The success of Spanish collectivization, 

151 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


under war conditions, seems amazing. One can obviously not be cer¬ 
tain whether these successes could have been secured and extended 
had it not been for the combined fascist, Communist, and liberal 
attack, but I can find no objective basis for the almost universal 
skepticism. Again, this seems to me merely a matter of irrational 
prejudice. 

107. The following is a brief description by the anarchist writer 
Gaston Leval, Ne Franco, Ne Stalin, le collettivita amrchiche spagnole 
nella lotta contro Franco e la reazione staliniana (Milan, Istituto Editor- 
iale Italiano, 1952), pp. 303 f.; sections reprinted in Collectivites 
amrchistes en Espagne revolutionnaire, Noir et Rouge, undated. 

In the middle of the month of June, the attack began in Aragon on 
a grand scale and with hitherto unknown methods. The harvest was 
approaching. Rifles in hand, treasury guards under Communist orders 
stopped trucks loaded with provisions on the highways and brought 
them to their offices. A little later, the same guards poured into the 
collectives and confiscated great quantities of wheat under the authority 
of the general staff with headquarters in Barbastro. . . . Later open 
attacks began, under the command of Lister with troops withdrawn 
from the front at Belchite more than 50 kilometers away, in the month 
of August. . . . The final result was that 30 percent of the collectives 
were completely destroyed. In Alcolea, the municipal council that 
governed the collective was arrested; the people who lived in the 
Home for the Aged . . . were thrown out on the street. In Mas de las 
Matas, in Monzon, in Barbastro, on all sides, there were arrests. 
Plundering took place everywhere. The stores of the cooperatives and 
their grain supplies were rifled; furnishings were destroyed. The 
governor of Aragon, who was appointed by the central government 
after the dissolution of the Council of Aragon—which appears to have 
been the signal for the armed attack against the collectives—protested. 

He was told to go to the devil. 

On October 22, at the National Congress of Peasants, the delegation 
of the Regional Committee of Aragon presented a report of which 
the following is the summary: 
