
25fi 


*= AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

man, in his recently published study of policy making under the 
Kennedy administration, To Move a Nation, discusses the at¬ 
tempt to concentrate the peasantry in “strategic hamlets” in the 
early 1960s, maintaining that “the primary role of the strategic 
hamlet was to provide [the peasants] ... a free choice between 
the Viet Cong and the government.” As he makes very clear, 
this “free choice” was to be provided by careful police work 
inside the hamlets (“for it seemed obvious that putting up de¬ 
fenses around a village would do no good if the defenses en¬ 
closed Viet Cong agents”); the failure of the program he at¬ 
tributes to the fact that “there had been no real effort to isolate 
the population from the Viet Cong by eliminating Viet Cong 
agents and supporters inside the strategic hamlets and by im¬ 
posing controls on the movement of people and supplies . . . 
Viet Cong supporters and agents . . . had no difficulty repene¬ 
trating the hamlet and continuing subversion.” Thus the pro¬ 
gram failed “to provide the villager with physical security, so 
that he has a choice of refusing to cooperate with the Viet Cong,” 
a “free choice” which is obviously denied him as long as Viet- 
cong supporters are permitted to exist in his village. 

There is no doubt an important difference between this level 
of self-deception and that of Marshal Ky, who describes the 
philosophy of his government as “100 percent social revolu¬ 
tionary,” 68 or CIA analyst George Carver, who tells us of “the 
genuine social revolution now taking place in the urban areas of 
South Vietnam.” 69 The natural reaction to such pronounce¬ 
ments is one of ridicule, but amusement fades when one begins 
to calculate the human cost. 

Let us return to Howard Zinn’s study (cf. note 1), in the light 
of some of these general observations. Zinn has some apt re¬ 
marks about the moral blindness that permits America to re¬ 
main insensitive to the agony of Vietnam. “We listen with the 


256 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


languor of a people who have never been bombed, who have 
only been the bombardiers. 5 ’ “We have no Hiroshima, no city of 
the blind and maimed, no professors haggard from long terms 
in jail ... we have never been forced ... to recognize our 
deeds, to bow, to apologize, to promise a life of peace. We 
have, in other words, never been caught. 55 Thus protest is muted 
and diffuse, as “Uncle Sam, the white-gloved financier of coun¬ 
terrevolution has removed his gloves, taken gun in hand, and 
moved into the jungle, 55 and has slowly composed “an enormous 
pattern of devastation which, if seen in its entirety, would have 
to be described as one of the most evil acts committed by any 
nation in modern times. 55 

There are, I think, certain gaps in Zinn’s analysis of the 
factors that prevent withdrawal of what can only be described as 
our army of occupation. Consider the matter of prestige. Zinn 
disposes effectively of the claim that our prestige as a nation 
would be diminished by withdrawal, noting that this would 
satisfy a range of opinion that extends from Adenauer to the 
Japanese left. But there is also the matter of internal prestige— 
the factor to which Eric Hobsbawm referred when he pointed 
out that American policy making often seems less concerned 
with red areas on the map than with red faces in the Penta¬ 
gon. 

Furthermore, it may be that in some respects Zinn under¬ 
estimates the subtlety of those whose arguments he counters. 
For example, he remarks that “we see every rebellion as the 
result of some plot concocted in Moscow or Peking, 55 and that 
the Russians make the same mistake, attributing revolts “in 
Hungary or Poznan ... to bourgeois influence or to American 
scheming. 55 Although one can, to be sure, become a prisoner of 
one’s own propaganda, it is nevertheless difficult to believe that 
the Russian leaders so misunderstood the events of 1956; more 


257 


- AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

likely, they were unwilling to tolerate an erosion of their power 
in a sensitive buffer area and found in “bourgeois influence” and 
“American scheming” a useful propaganda cover. Similarly, it 
strains credulity to suppose that our present Secretary of State 
was simply deluded when he described “the Peiping regime,” in 
1951, as “a colonial Russian Government—a Slavic Manchukuo 
on a larger scale.” Ample evidence was available to him to show 
the absurdity of this evaluation, for example, in the State De¬ 
partment White Paper on China published not long before. 
More likely, as in the case of the Hungarian revolution, it was 
necessary to find a way to justify a variety of long-range poli¬ 
