
The Saigon government has few illusions as to its legitimacy 
and status. Saigon officials have pointed out repeatedly that 
they cannot survive in an open political arena, and that there¬ 
fore the Americans must destroy not only the Vietcong military 
units but also its political and administrative structure, by such 
devices as the “pacification” program. A clear and forthright 
expression of this analysis appears in an interview with “one of 


226 



The Logic of Withdrawal 


the top generals in the junta, a man regarded by U.S. officials as 
politically the most sophisticated of the group/’ reported by 
George M. Kahin in a memorandum to a group of senators. 8 
The general describes the situation in the following terms: 

To defeat the communists we must win against them both politi¬ 
cally and militarily. But we are very weak politically and without 
the strong political support of the population which the NLF 
have. Thus now if we defeat them militarily, they can come to 
power because of their greater political strength. We now have 
(thanks to the support of our Allies) a strong military instru¬ 
ment. But we are without a political instrument that can compete 
with the communists in the south. Such a political instrument we 
must now begin to create, a process that will take a generation. It 
is unrealistic to speak of a cease fire until after we have built up 
our political strength to the point where we can compete with the 
communists successfully. 

He goes on to say that the war must be carried to North Viet¬ 
nam, with the commitment of a million American troops, then 
probably to China as well. Finally, he argues that “it might be 
necessary to move on to World War III so as to insure that 
communist power was fully removed from Vietnam,” a not 
unrealistic forecast, if the United States continues to insist that 
its proteges be spared the defeat that they know to be a cer¬ 
tainty if the struggle is ever permitted to shift to the political 
arena, where they lack “the strong political support of the popu¬ 
lation which the NLF have.” 

Buddhist leaders appear to share this analysis. In the cited 
memorandum, Kahin quotes Buddhist spokesmen, obviously 
unidentified, who point out that the present Saigon regime, 
dependent for its life on United States support, can do nothing 
