battles and dozens of assassinations, according to CNT 
sources. 107 

Bolloten’s detailed analysis of the events of the summer of 


106 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


1937 sheds considerable light on the question of peasant atti¬ 
tudes towards collectivization in Aragon: 

It was inevitable that the attacks on the collectives should have 
had an unfavorable effect upon rural economy and upon morale, 
for while it is true that in some areas collectivization was 
anathema to the majority of peasants, it is no less true that in 
others collective farms were organized spontaneously by the bulk 
of the peasant population. In Toledo province, for example, 
where even before the war rural collectives existed, 83 per cent of 
the peasants, according to a source friendly to the Communists, 
decided in favour of the collective cultivation of the soil. As the 
campaign against the collective farms reached its height just be¬ 
fore the summer harvest [1937] . . . a pall of dismay and ap¬ 
prehension descended upon the agricultural labourers. Work in 
the fields "was abandoned in many places or only carried on 
apathetically, and there was danger that a substantial portion of 
the harvest, vital for the war effort, would be left to rot. [P. 196] 

It was under these circumstances, he points out, that the 
Communists were forced to change their policy and—tempo¬ 
rarily—to tolerate the collectives. A decree was passed legaliz¬ 
ing collectives “during the current agricultural year” (his ital¬ 
ics) and offering them some aid. This “produced a sense of 
relief in the countryside during the vital period of the harvest.” 
Immediately after the crops had been gathered, the policy 
changed again to one of harsh repression. Bolloten cites Com¬ 
munist sources to the effect that “a short though fierce cam¬ 
paign at the beginning of August” prepared the way for the 
dissolution of the Council of Aragon. Following the dissolution 
decree, “the newly appointed Governor General, Jose Ignacio 
Mantecon, a member of the Left Republican Party, but a secret 
Communist sympathizer [who joined the party in exile, after 
the war], . . . ordered the break-up of the collective farms.” The 
means: Lister’s division, which restored the old order by force 


107 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


and terror. Bolloten cites Communist sources conceding the ex¬ 
cessive harshness of Lister’s methods. He quotes the Communist 
general secretary of the Institute of Agrarian Reform, who 
admits that the measures taken to dissolve the collectives were 
“a very grave mistake, and produced tremendous disorganiza¬ 
tion in the countryside,” as “those persons who were discon¬ 
tented with the collectives . . . took them by assault, carrying 
away and dividing up the harvest and farm implements without 
respecting the collectives that had been formed without vio¬ 
lence or pressure, that were prosperous, and that were a model 
of organization. ... As a result, labour in the fields was sus¬ 
pended almost entirely, and a quarter of the land had not been 
prepared at the time for sowing” (p. 200). Once again, it was 
necessary to ameliorate the harsh repression of the collectives, 
to prevent disaster. Summarizing these events, Bolloten de¬ 
scribes the resulting situation as follows: 

But although the situation in Aragon improved in some degree, 
the hatreds and resentments generated by the break-up of the 
collectives and by the repression that followed were never wholly 
dispelled. Nor was the resultant disillusionment that sapped the 
spirit of the Anarchosyndicalist forces on the Aragon front ever 
entirely removed, a disillusionment that no doubt contributed to 
the collapse of that front a few months later. . . . after the 
destruction of the collective farms in Aragon, the Communist 
Party was compelled to modify its policy, and support collectives 
also in other regions against former owners who sought the re¬ 
turn of confiscated land. . . . [Pp. 200-201] 

Returning to Jackson’s remarks, I think we must conclude 
that they seriously misrepresent the situation. 108 The dissolu¬ 
tion of the Council of Aragon and the large-scale destruction of 
the collectives by military force was simply another stage in the 
eradication of the popular revolution and the restoration of the 
old order. Let me emphasize that I am not criticizing Jackson 


108 



Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


for his negative attitude towards the social revolution, but 
