politics, Comorera” 87 —by virtue of his political views, the most 
willing collaborator with the general Communist party position. 
According to Jackson, Comorera “immediately took steps to end 
barter and requisitioning, and became a defender of the peas¬ 
ants against the revolution” (p. 314); he “ended requisition, 


93 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


restored money payments, and protected the Catalan peasants 
against further collectivization” (p. 361). This is all that Jack- 
son has to say about Juan Comorera. 

We learn more from other sources: for example, Borkenau, 
who was in Barcelona for the second time in January 1937—and 
is universally recognized as a highly knowledgeable and expert 
observer, with strong anti-anarchist sentiments. According to 
Borkenau, Comorera represented “a political attitude which can 
best be compared w T ith that of the extreme right wing of the 
German social-democracy. He had always regarded the fight 
against anarchism as the chief aim of socialist policy in Spain. 
. . . To his surprise, he found unexpected allies for his dislike 
[of anarchist policies] in the communists.” 88 It was impossible 
to reverse collectivization of industry at that stage in the pro¬ 
cess of counterrevolution; Comorera did succeed, however, in 
abolishing the system by which the provisioning of Barcelona 
had been organized, namely, the village committees, mostly 
under CNT influence, which had cooperated (perhaps, Bor¬ 
kenau suggests, unwillingly) in delivering flour to the towns. 
Continuing, Borkenau describes the situation as follows: 

. . . Comorera, starting from those principles of abstract liberal¬ 
ism which no administration has followed during the war, but of 
which right-wing socialists are the last and most religious ad¬ 
mirers, did not substitute for the chaotic bread committees a 
centralized administration. He restored private commerce in bread, 
simply and completely. There was, in January, not even a system 
of rationing in Barcelona. Workers were simply left to get their 
bread, with wages which had hardly changed since May, at in¬ 
creased prices, as well as they could. In practice it meant that 
the women had to form queues from four o’clock in the morning 
onwards. The resentment in the working-class districts was natu¬ 
rally acute, the more so as the scarcity of bread rapidly increased 
after Comorera had taken office . 89 


