government w r ere put under heavy pressure to withhold supplies from 
the Republic, although this too w*as quite legal. As noted, the Texaco 
Company was never even branded “unethical” or “unpatriotic,” these 
epithets of Roosevelt’s being reserved for those who tried to assist the 
Republic. The cynic might ask just w ? hy oil w ? as excluded from the 
Neutrality Act of January 1937, noting that wffiile Germany and Italy 
w r ere capable of supplying arms to Franco, they could not meet his 
demands for oil. 

The Texaco Oil Company continued to act upon the pro-Nazi sym¬ 
pathies of its head, Captain Thorkild Rieber, until August 1940, when 
the publicity began to be a threat to business. See Feis, op. cit., for 
further details. For more on these matters, see Richard P. Traina, 
American Diplomacy and the Spariish Civil War (Bloomington, Indiana 
University Press, 1968), pp. 166 f. 

141. Puzzo, op. cit., p. 160. He remarks: “A government in Madrid in 
which Socialists, Communists, and anarchists sat w T as not without 
menace to American business interests both in Spain and Latin Amer¬ 
ica” (p. 165). Hull, incidentally, was in error about the acts of the 
Spanish government. The irresponsible left-wing elements had not 
been given arms but had seized them, thus preventing an immediate 
Franco victory. 

142. See Jackson, op. cit., p. 458. 

143. Cf. Guttmann, op. cit., p. 197. Of course, American liberalism 
was always proloyalist, and opposed both to Franco and to the revolu¬ 
tion. The attitude towards the latter is indicated with accuracy by this 
comparison, noted by Guttmann, p. 165: “300 people met in Union 

156 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


Square to hear Liston Oak [see note 123] expose the Stalinists’ role in 
Spain; 20,000 met in Madison Square Garden to help Earl Browder 
and Norman Thomas celebrate the preservation of bourgeois democ¬ 
racy,” in July 1937. 

144. Ibid., p. 198. 

145. To conclude these observations about the international reaction, 
it should be noted that the Vatican recognized the Franco govern¬ 
ment de facto in August 1937 and de jure in May 1938. Immedi¬ 
ately upon Franco’s final victory, Pope Pius XII made the following 
statement: “Peace and victory have been willed by God to Spain . . . 
which has now given to proselytes of the materialistic atheism of our 
age the highest proof that above all things stands the eternal value of 
religion and of the Spirit.” Of course, the position of the Catholic 
Church has since undergone important shifts—something that cannot 
be said of the American government. 

146. See note 60. 

147. See, for example, the reference to Machajski in Harold D. Lass- 
well, The World Revolution of Our Time: A Framework for Basic 
Policy Research (Hoover Institute Studies; Stanford, Calif., Stanford 
University Press, 1951); reprinted, with extensions, in Harold D. 
Lasswell and Daniel Lerner, eds., World Revolutionary Elites: Studies 
in Coercive Ideological Movements (Cambridge, Mass., The M.I.T. 
Press, 1965), pp. 29-96. Daniel Bell has a more extensive discussion 
of Machajski’s critique of socialism as the ideology of a new system of 
exploitation in which the “intellectual workers” will dominate, in a 
very informative essay that bears directly on a number of the topics 
that have been mentioned here: “Two Roads from Marx: The Themes 
of Alienation and Exploitation, and Workers’ Control in Socialist 
Thought,” in The End of Ideology, pp. 335-68. 

148. Lasswell, op. cit., p. 85. In this respect, Lasswell’s prognosis 
resembles that of Bell in the essays cited earlier. 

149. Summarized in the Christian Science Monitor, March 15, 1968. 
I have not seen the text and therefore cannot judge the accuracy of the 
report. 

150. To mention just the most recent example: on January 22, 1968, 
McNamara testified before the Senate Armed Services Committee that 
“the evidence appears overwhelming that beginning in 1966 Commu¬ 
nist local and guerrilla forces have sustained substantial attrition. As a 
result, there has been a drop in combat efficiency and morale. . . .” 

157 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


The Tet offensive was launched within a week of this testimony. See /. 
F. Stone’s Weekly, February 19, 1968, for some highly appropriate 
commentary. 

151. The reality behind the rhetoric has been amply reported. A par¬ 
ticularly revealing description is given by Katsuichi Honda, a reporter 
for Asahi Shimbun, in Vietnam—A Voice from the Villages, 1967, 
obtainable from the Committee for the English Publication of “Viet¬ 
