
notes 64 and 95). Orwell remarks elsewhere that “In the English 
press, in particular, you would have to search for a long time before 
finding any favourable reference, at any period of the war, to the 
Spanish Anarchists. They have been systematically denigrated, and, as 
I know by my own experience, it is almost impossible to get anyone to 
print anything in their defence” (p. 159). Little has changed since. 

97. According to Orwell ( op . cit., pp. 153-54), “A British cruiser and 
two British destroyers had closed in upon the harbour, and no doubt 
there were other warships not far away. The English newspapers gave 
it out that these ships were proceeding to Barcelona ‘to protect British 
interests/ but in fact they made no move to do so; that is, they did not 
land any men or take off any refugees. There can be no certainty 
about this, but it was at least inherently likely that the British Gov¬ 
ernment, which had not raised a finger to save the Spanish Govern¬ 
ment from Franco, would intervene quickly enough to save it from its 
own working class.” This assumption may well have influenced the left- 
wing leadership to restrain the Barcelona workers from simply taking 
control of the whole city, as apparently they could easily have done in 
the initial stages of the May Days. 

Hugh Thomas comments (The Spanish Civil War , p. 428) that 
there was “no reason” for Orwell’s “apprehension” on this matter. In 
the light of the British record with regard to Spain, it seems to me that 
Thomas is simply unrealistic, as compared with Orwell, in this re¬ 
spect. 

98. Orwell, op. cit., pp. 143—44. 

99. Controversy, August 1937, cited by Morrow, p. 173. The predic¬ 
tion was incorrect, though not unreasonable. Had the Western powers 
and the Soviet Union wished, compromise would have been possible, it 
appears, and Spain might have been saved the terrible consequences of 
a Franco victory. See Brenan, op. cit., p. 331. He attributes the British 
failure to support an armistice and possible reconciliation to the fact 
that Chamberlain “saw nothing disturbing in the prospect of an Italian 
and German victory.” It would be interesting to explore more fully the 
attitude of Winston Churchill. In April 1937 he stated that a Franco 
victory would not harm British interests. Rather, the danger was a 
“success of the trotskyists and anarchists” (cited by Broue and Te- 
mime, op. cit., p. 172). Of some interest, in this connection, is the 
recent discovery of an unpublished Churchill essay written in March 
1939 —six months after Munich—in which he said that England 


148 



