of the city’s 20,000 houses damaged or destroyed, the majority de¬ 
stroyed. Riboud attempted to see one of the “mass graves” of victims 
of the North Vietnamese troops that have been reported by the Amer¬ 
ican Mission, but without success. According to the information he 
could gather, ARVN behavior compared quite unfavorably with that 
of the North Vietnamese and Vietcong, though the deepest bitterness 
and resentment is directed against the Americans, whose “blind and 
systematic bombardment” have turned Hue into “an assassinated 
city.” 

88. New York Times, February 14. 

89. Boston Globe, February 24, 1968. 


293 


* - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

90. New York Times, February 12, 1968. 

91. Boston Globe, February 24, 1968. 

92. Ibid., February 25, 1968. 

93. See the account by Peter Arnett, AP, February 7, 1968. 

94. Bernard Weinraub, New York Times, February 20, 1968. 

95. New York Times, April 4, 1968. 

96. Ibid., February 28, 1968. 

97. February 19, 1968, p. 39. Because of this report, Newsweek was 
banned from Saigon. The head of its Saigon bureau had already been 
banned from South Vietnam. 


294 


THE BITTER HERITAGE 


A REVIEW 


As a contribution to our understanding of the Vietnam war, 
Arthur Schlesinger’s Bitter Heritage does not seem to me to 
merit extensive discussion. As a contribution to our understand¬ 
ing of American ideology, it is of somewhat greater importance, 
as a specimen rather than a commentary. It is common, and 
quite legitimate, to identify a certain mainstream of political 
thought (which is, illegitimately, designated “responsible 
thought”) that stays within the rather narrow bounds of the 
prevailing ideology and does not challenge the conceptions, or 
the rationalizations, of those who have direct influence over 
decision making. Schlesinger’s position represents one “ex¬ 
treme,” the liberal wing of this “responsible approach.” He ex¬ 
presses with great clarity the liberal critique of the Vietnam war 
that developed when it became apparent that American force 
was probably not going to be able to suppress the Vietnamese 

This essay is reprinted, with a few additional remarks, from Ramparts, Vol. 5 
(April 1967). 


295 







AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


insurrection at an “acceptable” cost, to ourselves or to Vietnam. 
It is of more than historical interest to understand this critique, 
to determine the assumptions that underlie it, to appreciate the 
attitude towards the American role in international affairs that 
it reveals. It has always been possible that the Vietnamese affair 
might end in a global war or in an attempt by our former allies 
to construct a counterweight to American power. If the conse¬ 
quences are, on the other hand, something approaching the 
effective extermination of the Vietnamese (with no interna¬ 
tional repercussions) or a return of Vietnam to its own popula¬ 
tion with the withdrawal of the American army of occupation, 
then it is likely that we will revert to policies that fall within the 
responsible mainstream of thought and ideology, and that are 
illuminated by the kind of critique of the aberration of Vietnam 
—where the situation escaped our control—represented by 
Schlesinger’s analysis. 

The essential feature of Schlesinger’s critique of the American 
escalation in Vietnam is that it has a purely tactical basis. Else¬ 
where in these essays I have quoted his remark that, contrary 
to his expectations, the American attempt to “suppress the re¬ 
