ton impelled them to refuse, leading to expropriation and a 
sharp worsening of Cuban-American relations. Such incidents, 
and there are many, are interesting for those concerned with 


297 


* = AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

the dynamics of imperialism in the modern period. Schlesinger’s 
approach to the Vietnam war provides some understanding of 
the cultural factors that are involved in this complex interaction 
of real or perceived material interests, ideology, and govern¬ 
ment initiative. 

Schlesinger’s critique of current Vietnam policy is also inter¬ 
esting because of the role of its author in the Kennedy adminis¬ 
tration, when much of the groundwork for the present tragedy 
in Vietnam was laid. In this respect, it is of some value to 
“Washington watchers,” that is, to those who are interested in 
determining how American foreign policy develops and how it 
appears to those involved in its implementation. 

It is, for example, of interest to learn of the extent to which 
Schlesinger attributes our present tribulations to bureaucratic 
stupidity rather than Machiavellian intent. He raises the ques¬ 
tion, “which already haunts the American conscience,” as to 
whether we are “really carrying out this policy, as we constantly 
proclaim, to save the people we are methodically destroying,” 
or are we “doing it for less exalted purposes of our own. 7 ’ The 
question is not directly answered, but the implication is that 
stupidity and ignorance, rather than pursuit of self-interest, are 
to blame for the bitter heritage. Viewing the development of 
American policy from the outside, it seems not too difficult to 
construct a rationale. But Schlesinger’s judgment must be given 
weight. After all, he was there. 

Still, it is questionable how widely Schlesinger’s view of 
American innocence is shared. For example, he admits that 
there may appear to be “a gigantic American effort at the encir¬ 
clement and strangulation of China.” But, he asserts, this is not 
“our view of what we are doing; nor is it in fact what we are 
doing,” though “it really should not astonish us that a crew of 
dogmatic Marxist-Leninists should so interpret the extraordi- 


298 


