1966): “So far, the new Communist ‘dynasty’ has been very aggres¬ 
sive. Tibet was swallowed, India attacked, the Malays had to fight 12 
years to resist a ‘national liberation’ they could receive from the Brit¬ 
ish by a more peaceful route. Today, the apparatus of infiltration and 
aggression is already at work in North Thailand.” 

As to Malaya, Stevenson is probably confusing ethnic Chinese with 
the government of China. Those concerned with the actual events 
would agree with Harry Miller, in Communist Menace in Malaya 
(New York, Frederick A. Praeger, Inc., 1954), p. 230, that “Com¬ 
munist China continues to show little interest in the Malayan affair 
beyond its usual fulminations via Peking Radio.” There are various 
harsh things that one might say about Chinese behavior in w T hat the 
Sino-Indian Treaty of 1954 refers to as “the Tibet region of China,” 
but it is no more proof of a tendency towards expansionism than is the 
behavior of the Indian government with regard to the Naga and Mizo 
tribesmen. As to North Thailand, “the apparatus of infiltration” may 
well be at work, though there is little reason to suppose it to be 
Chinese—and it is surely not unrelated to the American use of 
Thailand as a base for its attack on Vietnam. This reference is the 
sheerest hypocrisy. 

The “attack on India” grew out of a border dispute that began 
several years after the Chinese had completed a road from Tibet to 
Sinkiang in an area so remote from Indian control that the Indians 
learned about this operation only from the Chinese press. According 
to American Air Force maps, the disputed area is in Chinese territory. 
Cf. Alastair Lamb, China Quarterly, No. 23 (July-September 1965), pp. 
202-7. To this distinguished authority, “it seems unlikely that the 
Chinese have been working out some master plan ... to take over the 
Indian sub-continent lock, stock and overpopulated barrel.” Rather, he 
thinks it likely that the Chinese were probably unaware that India even 
364 


The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


claimed the territory through which the road passed. After the Chinese 
military victory, Chinese troops were, in most areas, withdrawn be¬ 
yond the McMahon Line, a border which the British had attempted to 
impose on China in 1914 but which has never been recognized by 
China (Nationalist or Communist), the United States, or any other 
government. 

It is remarkable that a person in a responsible position could describe 
all of this as Chinese expansionism. In fact, it is absurd to debate the 
hypothetical aggressiveness of a China surrounded by American mis¬ 
siles and a still expanding network of military bases backed by an 
enormous American expeditionary force in Southeast Asia. It is con¬ 
