lyzed by Ithiel Pool, along lines that parallel Sacks’s contribu¬ 
tion to this collection of “scholarly, objective studies.” He begins 
by formulating a general proposition: “I rule out of considera¬ 
tion here a large range of viable political settlements,” namely, 
those that involve “the inclusion of the Viet Cong in a coalition 
government or even the persistence of the Viet Cong as a legal 
organization in South Vietnam.” Such arrangements “are not 
acceptable”—to us, that is. The only acceptable settlement is 
one “imposed by the GVN despite the persisting great political 
power of the Viet Cong.” 

There is, of course, a certain difficulty: “. . . the Viet Cong is 
too strong to be simply beaten or suppressed.” It follows, then, 
that we must provide inducements to the Vietcong activists to 
join our enterprise. This should not prove too difficult, he feels. 
The Vietcong leadership consists basically of bureaucratic types 
who are on the make. Cognitive dissonance theory suggests that 
this “discontented leadership” has “the potential for making a 
total break when the going gets too rough.” We must therefore 
provide them with “a political rationalization for changing 
sides.” The problem is ideological. We must induce a change in 
the “image of reality” of the Vietcong cadres, replacing their 
“naive ideology,” which sees the GVN as “American puppets 
and supporters of exploiters, the tax collectors, the merchants, 
the big landlords, the police, and the evil men in the villages,” 
by a more realistic conception. We can do this by emphasizing 


49 


+ - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

hamlet home rule and preventing the use of military forces to 
collect rents, a suggestion which will be greeted with enthusi¬ 
asm in Saigon, no doubt. The opportunity to serve as function¬ 
aries for a central government which pursues such policies will 
attract the Vietcong cadres and thus solve our problem, that of 
excluding from the political process the organization that con¬ 
tains the effective political leaders. 

Others have expressed a rather different evaluation of the 
human quality and motivation of these cadres. For example, 
Joseph Buttinger contrasts the inability of the Diem regime to 
mobilize support with the success of the NLF: “. . . that people 
willing to serve their country were to be found in Vietnam no 
one could doubt. The Vietminh had been able to enlist them by 
the tens of thousands and to extract from them superhuman 
efforts and sacrifices in the struggle for independence.” 27 Mili¬ 
tary reports by the dozens relate the amazing heroism and 
