why there should be a Monroe Doctrine in America and an 
Open Door principle in Asia, and suggests an international con¬ 
ference to resolve the outstanding problems of the area, noting, 
however, that few Americans would “entertain even for a mo¬ 
ment the idea of letting an international conference define the 
Monroe Doctrine and review Mexican relations.” He points out, 
quite correctly, that “the peace machinery of the world is in 
itself primarily the creation of the dominant races of the earth, 
of those who are the greatest beneficiaries from the mainte¬ 
nance of the status quo ” 

Nevertheless, it appears that few Japanese were willing to 
justify the Manchurian incident and subsequent events on the 
“pragmatic” grounds of self-interest. Rather, they emphasized 
the high moral character of the intervention, the benefits it 
would bring to the suffering masses (once the terrorism had 
been suppressed), and the intention of establishing an “earthly 
paradise” in the independent state of Manchukuo (later, in 
China as well), defended from Communist attack by the power 
of Japan. Maruyama observes that “what our wartime leaders 
accomplished by their moralizing was not simply to deceive the 
people of Japan or of the world; more than anyone else they 
deceived themselves.” 40 To illustrate, he quotes the observa¬ 
tions of American Ambassador Joseph Grew on the “self-decep¬ 
tion and lack of realism” in the upper strata of Japanese society: 


183 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


... I doubt if one Japanese in a hundred really believes that they 
have actually broken the Kellogg Pact, the Nine-Power Treaty, 
and the Covenant of the League. A comparatively few thinking 
men are capable of frankly facing the facts, and one Japanese 
said to me: “Yes, we’ve broken every one of these instruments; 
we’ve waged open war; the arguments of ‘self-defense’ and ‘self- 
determination for Manchuria’ are rot; but we needed Manchuria, 
and that’s that.” But such men are in the minority. The great 
majority of Japanese are astonishingly capable of really fooling 
themselves. ... It isn’t that the Japanese necessarily has his 
tongue in his cheek when he signs the obligation. It merely means 
that when the obligation runs counter to his own interests, as he 
conceives them, he will interpret the obligation to suit himself 
and, according to his own lights and mentality, he will very likely 
be perfectly honest in so doing. . . . Such a mentality is a great 
deal harder to deal with than a mentality which, however brazen, 
knows that it is in the wrong. 
