dom,” and to appreciate the substance of Muste’s radical paci¬ 
fist alternative, it is necessary to look with some care into the 
backgrounds of Japanese imperialism. 

Japan had been opened to Western influence by a threat of 
force in the mid-nineteenth century, and had then undertaken a 
remarkably successful effort at modernization. A new plutoc¬ 
racy replaced the old feudal structure, adopting the forms of 
parliamentary government. Mass participation in the develop¬ 
ing political structure was minimal; it is doubtful that the living 
standards of the peasantry and urban workers rose during the 
period of transition from a medieval to a modern capitalist 
society. Japan joined the other imperialist powers in the exploit 


170 



The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


tation of East Asia and took over Formosa, Korea, and parts of 
southern Manchuria. In short, by the late 1920s, Japan was 
what in modern political parlance is called a “democracy” and 
was attempting to play the normal role of a great power. 

A portent of danger lay in the virtual independence of the 
armed forces from the civilian government. The “dual diplo¬ 
macy” to which this gave rise was shortly to have disastrous 
consequences. 

The great European war of 1914-1918 gave Japan an oppor¬ 
tunity to extend its “rights and interests” in China and provided 
new markets for expanding Japanese industry. The revival of 
European competition came as a severe blow, and postwar 
diplomacy attempted vainly to construct a new and stable in¬ 
ternational system that would integrate Japan with the other 
imperialist powers. In good faith, Japan accepted the subordi¬ 
nate role assigned it and consented, throughout the twenties, to 
be a well-behaved member of the imperialist club. The Wash¬ 
ington Conference of 1921-1922 established the naval forces of 
America, England, and Japan in the ratio of 5:5:3, accepting 
the American position of “equality of security” rather than the 
Japanese goal of “equality of armaments.” As Schroeder com¬ 
ments, “the American argument was that Japan, a state sur¬ 
rounded on all sides by historic enemies and powerful rivals, 
had a superior natural situation for defense, while the United 
States, in the midst of two oceans without a powerful enemy on 
two continents, had defensively an inferior natural endow¬ 
ment.” 13 

The Washington Conference arrangements were renegotiated 
in the London Naval Treaty of 1930 involving Japan, Great 
Britain, and the United States. The matter is discussed in detail 
in a study by James Crowley. 14 In the negotiations leading to 
this treaty, Secretary of State Stimson placed emphasis on “the 


171 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


★= 

unusual problems posed by the necessity of the United States to 
defend two coastlines and on the ‘great concessions’ which the 
American government had made at the time of the Washington 
Conference.” Crowley points out that “throughout the 1920’s, 
Japan faithfully adhered to the terms of the Washington Con¬ 
ference treaties.” At issue in the subsequent negotiations was 
the question whether Japan could maintain its primary objec¬ 
tive: “supremacy over the American fleet in Japanese home 
waters.” The London Treaty, in effect, required that Japan 
abandon this objective. The London Treaty “did not render 
England a second-class naval power, nor did it endanger the 
safety of the United States or its insular possessions in the Pa¬ 
cific,” but it did compromise “the principle of Japanese naval 
hegemony in Japan’s own waters.” 

The domestic opposition to the treaty in Japan was a very 
serious matter. It led to a strengthening of the role of the mili¬ 
tary, which felt, with reason, that the civilian leadership was 
seriously endangering Japanese security. The treaty also evoked 
the first of “the series of violent attacks on the legally appointed 
leaders of Japan which would characterize the political history 
of that country during the 1930’s” when Premier Hamaguchi, 
who was responsible for the treaty, was shot by “a patriotic 
youth” in 1930. An immediate consequence of the treaty was 
the adoption by the opposition party of a platform insisting on 
“the maintenance of Japan’s privileged position in Manchuria, 
and a foreign policy which discounted the necessity of coopera¬ 
tion with the Anglo-American nations in defense of Japan’s 
continental interests or in the cause of naval armament agree¬ 
ments.” In summary, it seems clear that the refusal of the 
United States to grant to Japan hegemony in its waters (while 
of course insisting on maintaining its owm hegemony in the 
Western Atlantic and Eastern Pacific) was a significant con- 
