soulless murder?” Several “were offended by the way the camp 
[Dachau] had been fixed up, prettified.” (Does the “prettifka- 
tion” of Hiroshima—or, to take a closer analogue, the prettifica- 
tion of Los Alamos—provoke the same response?) To their 
credit, a few refer to Vietnam; but not once is a question raised 
—even to be dismissed—as to American conduct in the Second 
World War, or the “emotional and moral burden” carried by 
those whose “parent generation” stood by while two atom 
bombs were used against a beaten and virtually defenseless 
enemy. 

To free ourselves from the conformism and moral blindness 
that have become a national scandal, it is a good idea occasion¬ 
ally to read the measured reactions of conservative Asians to 
some of our own exploits. Consider, for example, the words of 
the Indian justice Radhabinod Pal, the leading Asian voice at 
the Tokyo Tribunal that assessed the war guilt of the Japanese. 
In his carefully argued (and largely ignored) dissenting opin¬ 
ion to the decision of the tribunal, he has the following remarks 
to make: 

The Kaiser Wilhelm II was credited with a letter to the Austrian 

Kaiser Franz Joseph in the early days of that war, w'herein he 

stated as follows: “My soul is torn, but everything must be put to 

fire and sword; men, women and children and old men must be 

168 


The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


slaughtered and not a tree or house be left standing. With these 
methods of terrorism, which are alone capable of affecting a 
people as degenerate as the French, the war will be over in two 
months, whereas if I admit considerations of humanity it will be 
prolonged for years. In spite of my repugnance I have therefore 
been obliged to choose the former system.” 

This showed his ruthless policy, and this policy of indiscriminate 
murder to shorten the war was considered to be a crime. In the 
Pacific war under our consideration, if there was anything approach¬ 
ing what is indicated in the above letter of the German Emperor, it 
is the decision coming from the allied powers to use the atom bomb. 
Future generations will judge this dire decision. History will say 
whether any outburst of popular sentiment against usage of such 
a weapon is irrational and only sentimental and whether it has 
become legitimate by such indiscriminate slaughter to win the 
victory by breaking the will of the whole nation to continue to 
fight. We need not stop here to consider whether or not “the atom 
bomb comes to force a more fundamental searching of the na¬ 
ture of warfare and of the legitimate means for the pursuit of 
military objectives.” It would be sufficient for my present purpose 
to say that if any indiscriminate destruction of civilian life and 
property is still illegitimate in warfare, then, in the Pacific war, 
this decision to use the atom bomb is the only near approach to 
the directives of the German Emperor during the first World War 
and of the Nazi leaders during the second World War. Nothing 
like this could be traced to the credit of the present accused. 11 

When we lament over the German conscience, we are de¬ 
manding of them a display of self-hatred—a good thing, no 
doubt. But for us the matter is infinitely more serious. It is not a 
matter of self-hatred regarding the sins of the past. Like the 
German Kaiser, we believe that everything must be put to fire 
and sword, so that the war will be more quickly finished—and 
we act on this belief. Unlike the German Kaiser, our soul is not 
torn. We manage a relative calm, as we continue, today, to 
write new chapters of history with the blood of the helpless and 
innocent. 


169 


* - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

Returning to Muste’s radical pacifism in the context of 1941, 
recall that the first of his proposals was that there be no attempt 
“to fasten sole war-guilt on any nation.” The second was that 
measures be taken to assure to all peoples equitable access to 
markets and essential materials. The immediate cause of the 
attack on Pearl Harbor was the recognition, by the Japanese 
military, that it was “now or never.” The Western powers con¬ 
trolled the raw materials on which their existence depended, 
and these supplies were being choked off in retaliation for ex¬ 
pansion on the mainland and association with Germany and 
Italy in the Tripartite Pact. Japan faced an American diplo¬ 
matic offensive aimed at changing it “from a hostile expansionist 
empire, with great pride in its destiny and ambitious plans for 
its future, to a peaceful, contented nation of merchants subcon¬ 
tracting with the United States to aid America’s fight against 
Hitler” 12 —precisely what was achieved by the war, if we re¬ 
place “Hitler” by “the international Communist conspiracy.” To 
understand the Japanese predicament more fully, to evaluate 
the claim that Japan represented the forces of “unprecedented 
evil” arrayed against the American-led “cause of human free¬ 
