

330 


The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


ter, in the general history of imperialist apologia—this inno¬ 
cence becomes increasingly distasteful as the power it serves 
grows more dominant in world affairs and more capable, there¬ 
fore, of the unconstrained viciousness that the mass media 
present to us each day. We are hardly the first power in history 
to combine material interests, great technological capacity, and 
an utter disregard for the suffering and misery of the lower 
orders. The long tradition of naivete and self-righteousness that 
disfigures our intellectual history, however, must serve as a 
warning to the Third World, if such a warning is needed, as to 
how our protestations of sincerity and benign intent are to be 
interpreted. 

The basic assumptions of the “New Frontiersmen 55 should be 
pondered carefully by those who look forward to the involve¬ 
ment of academic intellectuals in politics. For example, I have 
referred to Arthur Schlesinger’s objections to the Bay of Pigs 
invasion, but the reference was imprecise. True, he felt that it 
was a “terrible idea, 55 but “not because the notion of sponsoring 
an exile attempt to overthrow Castro seemed intolerable in 
itself. 55 Such a reaction would be the merest sentimentality, un¬ 
thinkable to a tough-minded realist. The difficulty, rather, was 
that it seemed unlikely that the deception could succeed. The 
operation, in his view, was ill-conceived but not otherwise ob¬ 
jectionable. 17 In a similar vein, Schlesinger quotes with ap¬ 
proval Kennedy’s “realistic 55 assessment of the situation resulting 
from Trujillo’s assassination: “There are three possibilities in 
descending order of preference: a decent democratic regime, a 
continuation of the Trujillo regime or a Castro regime. We 
ought to aim at the first, but we really can’t renounce the sec¬ 
ond until we are sure that we can avoid the third.” ls The 
reason why the third possibility is so intolerable is explained a 
few pages later: “Communist success in Latin America would 


331 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


deal a much harder blow to the power and influence of the 
United States.” Of course, we can never really be sure of avoid¬ 
ing the third possibility; therefore, in practice, we will always 
settle for the second, as we are now doing in Brazil and Argen¬ 
tina, for example . 19 

Or consider Walt Rostow’s views on American policy in 
Asia . 20 The basis on which we must build this policy is that “we 
are openly threatened and we feel menaced by Communist 
China.” To prove that we are menaced is of course unnecessary, 
and the matter receives no attention; it is enough that we feel 
menaced. Our policy must be based on our national heritage 
and our national interests. Our national heritage is briefly out¬ 
lined in the following terms: “Throughout the nineteenth cen¬ 
tury, in good conscience Americans could devote themselves to 
the extension of both their principles and their power on this 
continent,” making use of “the somewhat elastic concept of the 
Monroe doctrine” and, of course, extending “the American in¬ 
terest to Alaska and the mid-Pacific islands. . . . Both our insist¬ 
ence on unconditional surrender and the idea of post-war occu¬ 
pation . . . represented the formulation of American security 
interests in Europe and Asia.” So much for our heritage. As to 
our interests, the matter is equally simple. Fundamental is our 
“profound interest that societies abroad develop and strengthen 
those elements in their respective cultures that elevate and 
protect the dignity of the individual against the state.” At the 
same time, we must counter the “ideological threat,” namely 
“the possibility that the Chinese Communists can prove to 
Asians by progress in China that Communist methods are better 
and faster than democratic methods.” Nothing is said about 
those people in Asian cultures to whom our “conception of the 
proper relation of the individual to the state” may not be the 
uniquely important value, people who might, for example, be 


332 




The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


concerned with preserving the “dignity of the individual” 
against concentrations of foreign or domestic capital, or against 
semifeudal structures (such as Trujillo-type dictatorships) in¬ 
troduced or kept in power by American arms. All of this is 
flavored with allusions to “our religious and ethical value sys¬ 
tems” and to our “diffuse and complex concepts” which are to 
the Asian mind “so much more difficult to grasp” than Marxist 
dogma, and are so “disturbing to some Asians” because of “their 
