ruled out of consideration on flimsy premises involving public 
world opinion” 3 —“a shocking statement and a dangerous one,” 
as Clark rightly comments. In much the same way, behavioral 
scientists who believe themselves to be in possession of certain 
techniques of control and manipulation will tend to search for 
problems to which their knowledge and skills might be rele¬ 
vant, defining these as the “important problems”; and it will 
come as no surprise that they occasionally express their con¬ 
tempt for “flimsy premises involving public world opinion” that 
restrict the application of these skills. Thus among engineers, 
there are the “weapons cultists” who construct their bombs and 
missiles, and among the behavioral scientists, we find the tech¬ 
nicians who design and carry out “experiments with population 
and resources control methods” in Vietnam. 4 

These various factors—access to power, shared ideology, pro¬ 
fessionalization—may or may not be deplorable in themselves, 
but there can be no doubt that they interact so as to pose a 
serious threat to the integrity of scholarship in fields that are 
struggling for intellectual content and are thus particularly sus¬ 
ceptible to the workings of a kind of Gresham’s law. What is 
more, the subversion of scholarship poses a threat to society at 
large. The danger is particularly great in a society that encour¬ 
ages specialization and stands in awe of technical expertise. In 
such circumstances, the opportunities are great for the abuse of 


25 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


knowledge and technique—to be more exact, the claim to 
knowledge and technique. Taking note of these dangers, one 
reads with concern the claims of some social scientists that their 
discipline is essential for the training of those to whom they 
refer as “the mandarins of the future.” 5 Philosophy and litera¬ 
ture still “have their value,” so Ithiel Pool informs us, but it is 
psychology, sociology, systems analysis, and political science 
that provide the knowledge by which “men of power are 
humanized and civilized.” In no small measure, the Vietnam 
war was designed and executed by these new mandarins, and 
it testifies to the concept of humanity and civilization they are 
likely to bring to the exercise of power. 6 

Is the new access to power of the technical intelligentsia a 
delusion or a growing reality ? There are those who perceive the 
“skeletal structure of a new society” in which the leadership will 
rest “with the research corporation, the industrial laboratories, 
