the British or American role in this civil conflict, from late 1944. See 
D. G. Kousoulas, The Price of Freedom (Syracuse, N.Y., Syracuse 
University Press, 1953), and Revolution and Defeat (New York, Ox¬ 
ford University Press, 1965), for serious study of these events from a 
strongly anti-Communist point of view. 

12. For a detailed account, see James Warburg, Germany: Key to 
Peace (Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press, 1953), pp. 189 f. 
Warburg concludes that apparently “the Kremlin was now prepared to 
accept the creation of an All-German democracy in the Western sense 
of that word,” whereas the Western powers, in their response, “frankly 
admitted their plan ‘to secure the participation of Germany in a purely 
defensive European community’” (i.e. NATO). 

13. The United States in the World Arena , pp. 344-45. Incidently, 
those who quite rightly deplore the brutal suppression of the East 
German and Hungarian revolutions would do well to remember that 
these scandalous events might have been avoided had the United 
States been willing to consider proposals for neutralization of Central 
Europe. Some of George Kennan’s recent statements provide interest¬ 
ing commentary on this matter, for example, his comments on the 
falsity, from the outset, of the assumption that the USSR intended to 

361 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


attack or intimidate by force the Western half of the continent and 
that it was deterred by American force, and his remarks on the ster¬ 
ility and general absurdity of the demand for unilateral Soviet with¬ 
drawal from East Germany together with “the inclusion of a united 
Germany as a major component in a Western defense system based 
primarily on nuclear weaponry” (Edward Reed, ed., Peace on Earth 
[New York, Pocket Books, 1965]). 

It is worth noting that historical fantasy of the sort illustrated in 
Rostow’s remarks has become a regular State Department specialty. 
Thus we have Thomas Mann justifying our Dominican intervention as 
a response to actions of the “Sino-Soviet military bloc.” Or, to take a 
more considered statement, we have William Bundy’s analysis of 
stages of development of Communist ideology in his Pomona College 
address, February 12, 1966, in which he characterizes the Soviet 
Union in the 1920s and early 1930s as “in a highly militant and 
aggressive phase.” What is frightening about fantasy, as distinct from 
outright falsification, is the possibility that it may be sincere and may 
actually serve as the basis for formation of policy. 

14. New York Times, February 6, 1966. 

15. United States Policy Toward Asia, Hearings before the Subcom¬ 
mittee on the Far East and the Pacific of the Committee on Foreign 
Affairs, House of Representatives (Washington, Government Printing 
Office, 1966), p. 89. 

16. New York Times Book Review, November 20, 1966. Such com¬ 
ments call to mind the remarkable spectacle of President Kennedy 
counseling Cheddi Jagan on the dangers of entering into a trading 
relationship “which brought a country into a condition of economic 
dependence.” The reference, of course, is to the dangers in commercial 
relations with the Soviet Union. See Schlesinger, A Thousand Days, p. 
776. 

17. A Thousand Days, p. 252. 

18. Ibid., p. 769. 

19. Though this too is imprecise. One must recall the real character of 
the Trujillo regime to appreciate the full cynicism of Kennedy’s “real¬ 
istic” analysis. 

20. Walt W. Rostow and R. W. Hatch, An American Policy in Asia 
(New York, Technology Press and John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1955). 

21. “End of Either/Or,” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 45 (January 1967), pp. 
189-201. 

362 


The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


22. Christian Science Monitor, November 26, 1966. 

23. Ibid., December 5, 1966. 

24. Although, to maintain perspective, we should recall that in his 
wildest moments, Alfred Rosenberg spoke of the elimination of thirty 
million Slavs, not the imposition of mass starvation on a quarter of the 
human race. Incidentally, the analogy drawn here is highly “irrespon¬ 
sible,” in the technical sense of this neologism discussed earlier. That 
is, it is based on the assumption that statements and actions of Ameri¬ 
cans are subject to the same standards and open to the same interpre¬ 
tations as those of anyone else. 

25. New York Times, February 6, 1966. What is more, Goldberg 
