to give further information. 

Furthermore, it is by now also clear that the government, in 
the months since the elections, has fallen into an almost total 
paralysis, the only noticeable action being the intensive effort 
by the House to block the attempt to draft South Vietnamese 


233 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


boys of eighteen and nineteen to fight the American war. Tran 
Van Do, the Foreign Minister, explains that “we are not able to 
organize South Vietnam politically ... so we cannot accept the 
NLF as a political party . . . the integration of the front will be 
a political way to take over South Vietnam.” 26 The Mekong 
Delta, with 40 percent of the population (and as yet, no North 
Vietnamese soldiers), continues to be a Vietcong stronghold. 
Asked why, President Thieu states: “The main reason the Viet¬ 
cong remain so strongly entrenched in the Mekong Delta is that 
people there still believe there is little difference between the 
French whom they called colonialists, and the Americans whom 
they call imperialists.” 27 Another reason is pointed out by Con¬ 
gressman Reid, who notes that “70 percent of the tenant farm¬ 
ers of the lowlands and Mekong Delta now rent from absentee 
landlords who are living it up in Saigon” 28 —the attempt by 
Congressmen Reid and Moss to have the government release a 
detailed study of land measures in South Vietnam by the Gen¬ 
eral Accounting Office has so far been unsuccessful. 29 

Tran Van Do’s analysis is confirmed by Hanson Baldwin, 
who reports that “almost unanimously, . . . U.S. officials in 
Vietnam view the prospect of imminent negotiations with 
alarm” because inclusion of the NLF in a coalition would be 
“the kiss of death/’ 30 This attitude towards a negotiated settle¬ 
ment reveals itself continually in American diplomacy, with its 
constant posing of new, more extreme conditions whenever an 
opportunity for negotiations arises—as in the Ho Chi Minh- 
Johnson exchange of February 1967, when President Johnson 
proposed, as a condition for negotiations, that we should stop 
“augmenting” our forces in South Vietnam after North Vietnam 
had stopped all infiltration (we, of course, would be free to 
continue our own supply and “infiltration” operations, for our 
own far more extensive expeditionary forces, even after the 
