Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


draw American troops from the country.” This, however, would 
be “irrational,” because throughout the non-Communist world 
“respect for American patience and tolerance in dealing with 
nondemocratic governments would decline”; furthermore, 
“Thailand’s security and economic progress would be jeopard¬ 
ized.” To the pragmatic liberal, it is clear that confidence in our 
commitment to military dictatorships such as that in Thailand 
must be maintained, as in fact was implied by the moderate 
scholars’ document discussed earlier; and it would surely be 
unfortunate to endanger the prospects for further development 
along the lines that were initiated in such a promising way 
under American influence, and that are now secured by some 
40,000 American troops. 

A second alternative would be neutralization of Thailand and 
other nations in Southeast Asia. This also is irrational. For one 
thing, “the withdrawal of the American military presence would 
not be matched by the removal of any Communist forces”— 
there being no nonindigenous Communist forces—and there¬ 
fore we would gain nothing by this strategy. Furthermore, we* 
could never be certain that there would not be “infiltration of 
Communist insurgents in the future.” And finally, “the Thai 
leaders have decided to cooperate with the United States,” for 
reasons that are hardly obscure. 

A third alternative would be to use our power in Thailand to 
“push political and economic reforms.” But this policy alterna¬ 
tive would “do great damage to American strategy in Thailand 
and other non-Communist nations.” And what is more, “exten¬ 
sive interference in the domestic affairs of other nations, no 
matter how well intentioned, is contrary to American tradi¬ 
tions,” as our postwar record in Thailand clearly demon¬ 
strates. 43 

Therefore, we must turn to the fourth alternative, and main- 


67 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


tain our present policy. “This alternative is probably the most 
rational and realistic. The military policy can be enhanced if it 
is realized that only American military power is capable of 
preventing large-scale overt aggression in Southeast Asia, and 
the proper role for the Thai armed forces is to be prepared to 
cope with limited guerrilla warfare.” 

This exposition of United States policy in Thailand and the 
directions it should take conforms rather well to the general 
lines of pragmatic liberalism as drawn by Hilsman, among oth¬ 
ers. It also indicates clearly the hope that we offer today to the 
•countries on the fringes of Asia. Vietnam may be an aberration. 
Our impact on Thailand, however, can hardly be attributed to 
the politics of inadvertence. 

An interesting sidelight is Darling’s explanation in Thailand 
and the United States of how, in an earlier period, “the Western 
-concept of the rule of law” was disseminated through American 
influence. “Evidence that some officials were obtaining an un¬ 
derstanding of the rule of law was revealed” by the statement 
of a Thai minister who pointed out that “it is essential to the 
prosperity of a nation that it should have fixed laws, and that 
nobles should be restrained from oppressing the people, other¬ 
wise the latter were like chickens, who instead of being kept for 
their eggs, were killed off.” In its international behavior as well, 
the Thai government came to understand the necessity for the 
rule of law: “A growing respect for law was also revealed in the 
adherence of the Thai government to the unequal restrictions 
contained in the treaties with the Western nations in spite of 
the heavy burden they imposed on the finances of the king¬ 
dom.” This is all said without irony. In fact, the examples clarify 
nicely what the “rule of law” means to weak nations, and to the 
exploited in any society. 

Darling, Hilsman, and many others whom I have been dis¬ 
cs 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


cussing represent the moderate liberal wing of scholarship on 
international affairs. It may be useful to sample some of the 
other views that appear in American scholarship. Consider, for 
example, the proposals of Thomas R. Adam, professor of polit¬ 
ical science at New York University . 44 

Adam begins by outlining an “ideal solution” to American 
problems in the Pacific, towards which we should bend our 
efforts. The ideal solution would have the United States recog¬ 
nized as “the responsible military protagonist of all Western 
interests in the area” with a predominant voice in a unified 
Western policy. United States sovereignty over some territorial 
base in the area would give us “ideal conditions for extending 
