6. “The Making of a Dove,” The Progressive , 1968, distributed by 
Vietnam Information Project, 100 Maryland Avenue N.E., Washing¬ 
ton, D.C. 20002. This project consists of a group of returned IVS 
workers who are trying to bring to the attention of the American 
people some of the facts about what is happening in the villages of 
Vietnam. They are, in fact, the only Americans who have significant 
firsthand information about this matter. They are to be contrasted 
with the visiting political scientists who seem to believe that interviews 
with captured prisoners or defectors give a fair account of attitudes in 
rural Vietnam. It is worth mentioning that the IVS workers were, as a 
group, more or less committed to the American effort, and even after 
resigning in protest against what they had seen, did not question our 

21 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


right to restructure Vietnamese society along lines that appear to us 
appropriate. See page 251 below. 

7. ‘‘Truck Versus Dam,” Christian Science Monitor, September 5, 
1967. To the reader who suspects that this is irony, I can only propose 
that he read the article in full. 

8. Amando Doronila, “Hanoi Food Output Held Target of U.S. 
Bombers,” AP, Christian Science Monitor, September 8, 1967. 

9. See the memorandum by Gabriel Kolko to the Russell Tribunal, 
quoted in Liberation, Vol. 12 (May-June 1967), p. 13. Eisenhower 
regarded this despicable act as “a blot on [the] military honor” of the 
German Commander and warned that he and his cohorts would be 
considered “violators of the laws of war who must face the certain 
consequences of their acts.” 

10. C. Wright Mills, The Sociological Imagination (New York, Ox¬ 
ford University Press, 1959), p. 194. 

11. All quotes from Rudolf Rocker, “Anarchism and Anarcho-syndi¬ 
calism,” in Paul Eltzbacher, ed., Anarchism (London, Freedom Press, 
1960), pp. 225-68. Equally characteristic of “New Left” thinking is 
the judgment that Rocker quotes from Kropotkin regarding Bolshevik 
Russia: “Russia has shown us the way in which Socialism cannot be 
realized. . . . The idea of workers’ councils for the control of the 
political and economic life of the country is, in itself, of extraordinary 
importance . . . but so long as the country is dominated by the 
dictatorship of a party, the workers’ and peasants’ councils naturally 
lose their significance. They are degraded to the same passive role 
which the representatives of the Estates used to play in the time of the 
absolute Monarchy.” Rocker himself comments that “the dictatorship 
of the proletariat paved the way not for a socialist society but for the 
most primitive type of bureaucratic state capitalism and a reversion to 
political absolutism which was long ago abolished in most countries by 
bourgeois revolutions.” 

12. Address at Princeton, N.J., August 10, 1953. Cited in John K. Bunzel. 
Anti-Politics in America (New York, Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., 1967), p. 166. 


22 


OBJECTIVITY AND LIBERAL 
SCHOLARSHIP 


i 


In a recent essay, Conor Cruise O'Brien speaks of the process of 
“counterrevolutionary subordination" which poses a threat to 
scholarly integrity in our own counterrevolutionary society, just 
as “revolutionary subordination," a phenomenon often noted 
and rightly deplored, has undermined scholarly integrity in rev¬ 
olutionary and postrevolutionary situations . 1 He observes that 
“power in our time has more intelligence in its service, and 
allows that intelligence more discretion as to its methods, than 
ever before in history," and suggests that this development is 
not altogether encouraging, since we have moved perceptibly 
towards the state of “a society maimed through the systematic 

Parts of this essay were delivered as a lecture at New York University in 
March 1968, as part of the Albert Schweitzer Lecture Series, and will appear in 
Power and Consciousness in Society , edited by Conor Cruise O’Brien and 
published by New York University Press. I am indebted to Paul Potter, Andre 
Schiffrin, and William Watson for very helpful comments. 


23 







* = AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

corruption of its intelligence.” He urges that “increased and 
