the experimental stations, and the universities,” with “the sci¬ 
entists, the mathematicians, the economists, and the engineers 
of the new computer technology”—“not only the best talents, 
but eventually the entire complex of social prestige and social 
status, will be rooted in the intellectual and scientific communi¬ 
ties.” 7 A careful look at the “skeletal structure” of this new 
society, if such it is, is hardly reassuring. As Daniel Bell points 
out, “it has been war rather than peace that has been largely 
responsible for the acceptance of planning and technocratic 
modes in government,” and our present “mobilized society” is 
one that is geared to the “social goal” of “military and war 
preparedness.” Bell’s relative optimism regarding the new soci¬ 
ety comes from his assumption that the university is “the place 
where theoretical knowledge is sought, tested, and codified in a 
disinterested way” and that “the mobilized postures of the Cold 
War and the space race” are a temporary aberration, a reaction 


26 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


to Communist aggressiveness. In contrast, a strong argument 
can be made that the university has, to a significant degree, 
betrayed its public trust; that matters of foreign policy are very 
much “a reflex of internal political forces” as well as of eco¬ 
nomic institutions (rather than “a judgment about the national 
interest, involving strategy decisions based on the calculations 
of an opponent’s strength and intentions”); that the mobiliza¬ 
tion for war is not “irony” but a natural development, given our 
present social and economic organization; that the technologists 
who achieve power are those who can perform a service for 
existing institutions; and that nothing but catastrophe is to be 
expected from still further centralization of decision making in 
government and a narrowing base of corporate affiliates. The 
experience of the past few years gives little reason to feel opti¬ 
mistic about these developments. 

Quite generally, what grounds are there for supposing that 
those whose claim to power is based on knowledge and tech¬ 
nique will be more benign in their exercise of power than those 
whose claim is based on wealth or aristocratic origin? On the 
contrary, one might expect the new mandarin to be dangerously 
arrogant, aggressive, and incapable of adjusting to failure, as 
compared with his predecessor, whose claim to power was not 
diminished by honesty as to the limitations of his knowledge, 
lack of work to do, or demonstrable mistakes. 8 In the Vietnam 
catastrophe, all of these factors are detectable. There is no point 
in overgeneralizing, but neither history nor psychology nor 
sociology gives us any particular reason to look forward with 
hope to the rule of the new mandarins. 

In general, one would expect any group with access to power 
and affluence to construct an ideology that will justify this state 
of affairs on grounds of the general welfare. For just this reason, 
Bell’s thesis that intellectuals are moving closer to the center of 

2T 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


power, or at least being absorbed more fully into the decision¬ 
making structure, is to some extent supported by the phenome¬ 
non of counterrevolutionary subordination noted earlier. That 
is, one might anticipate that as power becomes more accessible, 
the inequities of the society will recede from vision, the status 
quo will seem less flawed, and the preservation of order will 
become a matter of transcendent importance. The fact is that 
American intellectuals are increasingly achieving the status of a 
doubly privileged elite: first, as American citizens, with respect 
to the rest of the world; and second, because of their role in 
American society, which is surely quite central, whether or not 
Bell's prediction proves accurate. In such a situation, the dan¬ 
gers of counterrevolutionary subordination, in both the domes¬ 
tic and the international arena, are apparent. I think that 
O’Brien is entirely correct in pointing to the necessity for “in¬ 
creased and specific vigilance” towards the danger of counter¬ 
revolutionary subordination, of which, as he correctly remarks, 
“we hear almost nothing.” I would like to devote this essay to a 
number of examples. 

Several years ago it was enthusiastically proclaimed that “the 
fundamental political problems of the industrial revolution have 
been solved,” and that “this very triumph of democratic social 
evolution in the West ends domestic politics for those intel¬ 
lectuals who must have ideologies or utopias to motivate them 
to social action.” 9 During this period of faith in “the end of 
ideology,” even enlightened and informed commentators were 
inclined to present the most remarkable evaluations of the state 
of American society. Daniel Bell, for example, wrote that “in 
the mass consumption economy all groups can easily acquire 
the outward badges of status and erase the visible demarca¬ 
tions.” 10 Writing in Commentary in October 1964, he main- 


28 
