nam” (Douglas Pike); that we supervised the destruction of the 
Buddhist opposition; that we offered the peasants a “free 
choice” between the Saigon government and the National Lib¬ 
eration Front by herding them into strategic hamlets from 
which NLF cadres and sympathizers were eliminated by the 
police (Roger Hilsman); and so on. The story is familiar. And 
we can emphasize what must be obvious to a person with a 
grain of political intelligence: that the present world problem is 
not “containing China” but containing the United States. 

More important, we can ask the really fundamental question. 
Suppose that it were in the American “national interest” to 
pound into rubble a small nation that refuses to submit to our 
will. Would it then be legitimate and proper for us to act “in 
this national interest”? The Rusks and the Humphreys and the 
Citizens Committee say yes. Nothing could show more clearly 
how we are taking the road of the fascist aggressors of a gen¬ 
eration ago. 

We are, of course, in a domestic political environment very 
different from that of the citizens of Germany or Japan. Here, it 
takes no heroism to protest. We have many avenues open to us 


378 



On Resistance 


to drive home the lesson that there is not one law for the United 
States and one for the rest of mankind, that no one has ap¬ 
pointed us judge and executioner for Vietnam or anywhere else. 
Many avenues of political education, on and off the campus, 
have been explored in the past two years. There can be no ques¬ 
tion that this effort should continue and grow to whatever limit 
the degree of commitment permits. 

Some seem to feel that resistance will “blacken” the peace 
movement and make it difficult to reach potential sympathizers 
through more familiar channels. I don’t agree with this objec¬ 
tion, but I feel that it should not be lightly disregarded. Resis¬ 
ters who hope to save the people of Vietnam from destruction 
must select the issues they confront and the means they employ 
in such a way as to attract as much popular support as possible 
for their efforts. There is no lack of clear issues and honorable 
means, surely, hence no reason why one should be impelled to 
ugly actions on ambiguous issues. In particular, it seems to me 
that draft resistance, properly conducted (as it has been so 
