intrigues of the great imperialist powers of Europe. Despite this 
the Spanish revolutionaries have not grasped at the disastrous 
expedient of dictatorship, but have respected all honest convic¬ 
tions. Everyone who visited Barcelona after the July battles, 
whether friend or foe of the C.N.T., was surprised at the freedom 
of public life and the absence of any arrangements for suppress¬ 
ing the free expression of opinion. 

For two decades the supporters of Bolshevism have been 
hammering it into the masses that dictatorship is a vital necessity 
for the defense of the so-called proletarian interests against the 
assaults of the counter-revolution and for paving the way for 
Socialism. They have not advanced the cause of Socialism by this 
propaganda, but have merely smoothed the way for Fascism in 
Italy, Germany and Austria by causing millions of people to 
forget that dictatorship, the most extreme form of tyranny, can 
never lead to social liberation. In Russia, the so-called dictator¬ 
ship of the proletariat has not led to Socialism, but to the domi¬ 
nation of a new bureaucracy over the proletariat and the whole 
people. . . . 

What the Russian autocrats and their supporters fear most is 
that the success of libertarian Socialism in Spain might prove to 
their blind followers that the much vaunted “necessity of a dic¬ 
tatorship” is nothing but one vast fraud which in Russia has led 
to the despotism of Stalin and is to serve today in Spain to help 
the counter-revolution to a victory over the revolution of the 
workers and peasants . 73 

After decades of anti-Communist indoctrination, it is difficult 
to achieve a perspective that makes possible a serious evalua- 


82 




Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


tion of the extent to which Bolshevism and Western liberalism 
have been united in their opposition to popular revolution. 
However, I do not think that one can comprehend the events in 
Spain without attaining this perspective. 

With this brief sketch—partisan, but I think accurate—for 
background, I would like to turn to Jackson’s account of this 
aspect of the Spanish Civil War (see note 54). 

