cally wrong in American society. 

In one of his last published essays, Muste describes himself as 
an “unrepentant unilateralist, on political as well as moral 
grounds.” 3 In part, he bases his position on an absolute moral 
commitment that one may accept or reject, but that cannot be 
profitably debated. In part, he defends it on grounds that seem 
to me not very persuasive, a psychological principle that “like 
produces like, kindness provokes kindness,” hence an appeal to 
“the essential humanity of the enemy.” 4 It is very difficult to 
retain a faith in the “essential humanity” of the SS trooper 
or the commissar or the racist blinded with hate and fear, or, 
for that matter, the insensate victim of a lifetime of anti-Com- 
munist indoctrination. When the enemy is a remote technician 
programming B-52 raids or “pacification,” there is no possibility 


162 


The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


for a human confrontation and the psychological basis for 
nonviolent tactics, whatever it may be, simply evaporates. 
A society that is capable of producing concepts like “un- 
American” and “peacenik”—of turning “peace” into a dirty 
word—has advanced a long way towards immunizing the indi¬ 
vidual against any human appeal. American society has reached 
the stage of near total immersion in ideology. The commitment 
has vanished from consciousness—what else can a right-think¬ 
ing person possibly believe? Americans are simply “pragmatic,” 
and they must bring others to this happy state. Thus an official 
of the Agency for International Development can write, with 
no trace of irony, that our goal is to move nations “from doctri¬ 
naire reliance on state enterprise to a pragmatic support of 
private initiative,” 5 and a headline in the New York Times can 
refer to Indian capitulation to American demands concerning 
the conditions of foreign investment as India's “drift from so¬ 
cialism to pragmatism” (see page 355 below). With this narrow¬ 
ing of the range of the thinkable comes an inability to compre¬ 
hend how the weak and dispossessed can resist our benevolent 
manipulation of their lives, an incapacity to react in human 
terms to the misery that we impose. 

The only useful way to evaluate the program of unilateral 
revolutionary pacifism is to consider what it implies in concrete 
historical circumstances. As a prescription for the United States 
in the mid-sixties, it is much too easy to defend. There is no 
particular merit in being more reasonable than a lunatic; corre¬ 
