very lack of dogmatism.” 

Such intellectual contributions as these suggest the need for a 
correction to De Gaulle’s remark, in his memoirs, about the 
American “will to power, cloaking itself in idealism.” By now, 
this will to power is not so much cloaked in idealism as it is 
drowned in fatuity. And academic intellectuals have made their 
unique contribution to this sorry picture. 

Let us, however, return to the war in Vietnam and the re¬ 
sponse that it has aroused among American intellectuals. A strik¬ 
ing feature of the recent debate on Southeast Asian policy has 
been the distinction that is commonly drawn between “respon¬ 
sible criticism,” on the one hand, and “sentimental” or “emo¬ 
tional” or “hysterical” criticism, on the other. There is much to 
be learned from a careful study of the terms in which this 
distinction is drawn. The “hysterical critics” are to be identified, 
apparently, by their irrational refusal to accept one fundamen¬ 
tal political axiom, namely, that the United States has the right 
to extend its power and control without limit, insofar as is 
feasible. Responsible criticism does not challenge this assump¬ 
tion, but argues, rather, that we probably can’t “get away with 
it” at this particular time and place. 

A distinction of this sort seems to be what Irving Kristol has 
in mind, for example, in his analysis of the protest over Vietnam 
policy, in Encounter, August 1965. He contrasts the responsible 


333 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


critics, such as Walter Lippmann, the New York Times , and 
Senator Fulbright, with the “teach-in movement/’ “Unlike the 
university protesters,” he maintains, “Mr. Lippmann engages in 
no presumptuous suppositions as to ‘what the Vietnamese peo¬ 
ple really want’—he obviously doesn’t much care—or in legalis¬ 
tic exegesis as to whether, or to what extent, there is ‘aggres¬ 
sion’ or ‘revolution’ in South Vietnam. His is a realpolitik point 
of view; and he will apparently even contemplate the possibility 
of a nuclear war against China in extreme circumstances.” This 
is commendable, and contrasts favorably, for Kristol, with the 
talk of the “unreasonable, ideological types” in the teach-in 
movement, who often seem to be motivated by such absurdities 
as “simple, virtuous ‘anti-imperialism.’ ” who deliver “harangues 
on ‘the power structure,’ ” and who even sometimes stoop so 
low as to read “articles and reports from the foreign press on 
the American presence in Vietnam.” Furthermore, these nasty 
types are often psychologists, mathematicians, chemists, or 
philosophers (just as, incidentally, those most vocal in protest in 
the Soviet Union are generally physicists, literary intellectuals, 
and others remote from the exercise of power), rather than 
people with Washington contacts, who of course realize that 
“had they a new, good idea about Vietnam, they would get a 
prompt and respectful hearing” in Washington. 

I am not interested here in whether Kristol’s characterization 
of protest and dissent is accurate, but rather in the assumptions 
that it expresses with respect to such questions as these: Is the 
purity of American motives a matter that is beyond discussion, 
or that is irrelevant to discussion? Should decisions be left to 
“experts” w T ith Washington contacts—that is, even if w T e assume 
that they command the necessary knowledge and principles to 
make the “best” decision, will they invariably do so? And, a 
logically prior question, is “expertise” applicable—that is, is 


334 


The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


there a body of theory and of relevant information, not in the 
public domain, that can be applied to the analysis of foreign 
policy or that demonstrates the correctness of present actions in 
some way that the psychologists, mathematicians, chemists, and 
philosophers are incapable of comprehending? Although Kristol 
does not examine these questions directly, his attitudes presup¬ 
pose answers, answers which are wrong in all cases. American 
aggressiveness, however it may be masked in pious rhetoric, is a 
dominant force in world affairs and must be analyzed in terms 
of its causes and motives. There is no body of theory or signifi¬ 
cant body of relevant information, beyond the comprehension 
of the layman, which makes policy immune from criticism. To 
the extent that “expert knowledge” is applied to world affairs, it 
is surely appropriate—for a person of any integrity, quite neces¬ 
sary—to question its quality and the goals that it serves. These 
facts seem too obvious to require extended discussion. 

A corrective to Kristol’s curious belief in the administration’s 
openness to new thinking about Vietnam is provided by Mc- 
George Bundy in a recent article. 21 As Bundy correctly ob¬ 
serves, “on the main stage ... the argument on Viet Nam turns 
on tactics, not fundamentals,” although, he adds, “there are 
wild men in the wings.” On stage center are, of course, the 
President (who in his recent trip to Asia had just “magisterially 
