Franz Borkenau, in commenting on the demoralization 
caused by the authoritarian practices of the central government, 
observes (p. 295) that “newspapers are written by Euro¬ 
peanized editors, and the popular movement is inarticulate as 
to its deepest impulses . . . [which are shown only] ... by acts.” 
The objectivity of scholarship will remain a delusion as long as 
these inarticulate impulses remain beyond its grasp. As far as 
the Spanish revolution is concerned, its history is yet to be 
written. 

I have concentrated on one theme—the interpretation of the 
social revolution in Spain—in one work of history, a work that 
is an excellent example of liberal scholarship. It seems to me 
that there is more than enough evidence to show that a deep 
bias against social revolution and a commitment to the values 
and social order of liberal bourgeois democracy has led the 
author to misrepresent crucial events and to overlook major 
historical currents. My intention has not been to bring into 
question the commitment to these values—that is another mat¬ 
ter entirely. Rather, it has been to show how this commitment 
has led to a striking failure of objectivity, providing an example 
of “counterrevolutionary subordination” of a much more subtle 
and interesting sort—and ultimately, I believe, a far more im¬ 
portant one—than those discussed in the first part of this 
essay. 


Ill 


In opening this discussion of the Spanish revolution I referred 
to the classical left-wing critique of the social role of intellec- 


124 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


tuals, Marxist or otherwise, in modern society, and to Luxem¬ 
burg’s reservations regarding Bolshevism. Western sociologists 
have repeatedly emphasized the relevance of this analysis to 
developments in the Soviet Union, 147 with much justice. The 
same sociologists formulate “the world revolution of the epoch” 
in the following terms: “The major transformation is the decline 
of business (and of earlier social formations) and the rise of 
intellectuals and semi-intellectuals to effective power.” 148 The 
“ultra-left” critic foresaw in these developments a new attack on 
human freedom and a more efficient system of exploitation. The 
