potentially hostile.” Second, “a country like the United States 
probably cannot maintain self-confidence if just about the 
greatest thing it ever attempted, namely to create the basis for 
decency and prosperity and democratic government in the un¬ 
derdeveloped world, had to be acknowledged as a failure or as 
an attempt that we wouldn’t try again.” It surpasses belief that 
a person with even minimal acquaintance with the record of 
American foreign policy could produce such statements. 

It surpasses belief, that is, unless we look at the matter from a 


329 


*= AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

more historical point of view, and place such statements in the 
context of the hypocritical moralism of the past; for example, of 
Woodrow Wilson, who was going to teach the Latin Americans 
the art of good government, and who wrote (1902) that it is 
“our peculiar duty” to teach colonial peoples “order and self- 
control . . . [and] . . . the drill and habit of law T and obedience.” 
Or of the missionaries of the 1840s, who described the hideous 
and degrading opium wars as “the result of a great design of 
Providence to make the wickedness of men subserve his pur¬ 
poses of mercy toward China, in breaking through her wall of 
exclusion, and bringing the empire into more immediate contact 
with western and Christian nations.” Or, to approach the 
present, of A. A. Berle, who, in commenting on the Dominican 
intervention, has the impertinence to attribute the problems of 
the Caribbean countries to imperialism —Russian imperial¬ 
ism. 16 

As a final example of this failure of skepticism, consider the 
remarks of Henry Kissinger in concluding his presentation in a 
Harvard-Oxford television debate on American Vietnam poli¬ 
cies. He observed, rather sadly, that what disturbs him most is 
that others question not our judgment but our motives—a re¬ 
markable comment on the part of one whose professional con¬ 
cern is political analysis, that is, analysis of the actions of gov¬ 
ernments in terms of motives that are unexpressed in official 
propaganda and perhaps only dimly perceived by those whose 
acts they govern. No one would be disturbed by an analysis of 
the political behavior of Russians, French, or Tanzanians, ques¬ 
tioning their motives and interpreting their actions in terms of 
long-range interests, perhaps well concealed behind official 
rhetoric. But it is an article of faith that American motives are 
pure and not subject to analysis (see note 1). Although it is 
nothing new in American intellectual history—or, for that mat- 
