63. A useful account of this period is given by Felix Morrow, Revo¬ 
lution and Counter-Revolution in Spain (1938; reprinted London, 
New Park Publications, 1963). 

64. Cited by Camillo Berneri in his “Lettre ouverte a la camarade 
Frederica [sic] Montseny,” Guerre de classes en Espagne (Paris, 
1946), a collection of items translated from his journal Guerra di 
Classe. Berneri was the oustanding anarchist intellectual in Spain. He 
opposed the policy of joining the government and argued for an al¬ 
ternative, more typically anarchist strategy to which I will return 
below. His own view towards joining the government was stated suc¬ 
cinctly by a Catalan worker whom he quotes, with reference to the 
Republic of 1931: “It is always the old dog with a new collar.” Events 
were to prove the accuracy of this analysis. 

Berneri had been a leading spokesman of Italian anarchism. He left 
Italy after Mussolini’s rise to power, and came to Barcelona on July 
19, 1936. He formed the first Italian units for the antifascist war, 
according to anarchist historian Rudolf Rocker ( The Tragedy of Spain 
[New York, Freie Arbeiter Stimme, 1937], p. 44). He was murdered, 
along with his older comrade Barbieri, during the May Days of 1937. 
(Arrested on May 5 by the Communist-controlled police, he was shot 
during the following night.) Hugh Thomas, in The Spanish Civil War , 
p. 428, suggests that “the assassins may have been Italian Commu¬ 
nists” rather than the police. Thomas’ book, which is largely devoted 
to military history, mentions Berneri’s murder but makes no other 
reference to his ideas or role. 

Berneri’s name does not appear in Jackson’s history. 

65. Burnett Bolloten, The Grand Camouflage: The Communist Con - 

139 


★= AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

spiracy in the Spanish Civil War (New York, Frederick A. Praeger, 
Inc., 1961), p. 86. This book, by a UP correspondent in Spain during 
the Civil War, contains a great deal of important documentary evi¬ 
dence bearing on the questions considered here. The attitude of the 
wealthy farmers of this area, most of them former supporters of the 
right-wing organizations that had now disappeared, is well described 
by the general secretary of the Peasant Federation, Julio Mateu: 
“Such is the sympathy for us [that is, the Communist party] in the 
Valencia countryside that hundreds and thousands of farmers would 
join our party if we were to let them. These farmers . . . love our party 
like a sacred thing . . . they [say] The Communist Party is our party.’ 
Comrades, what emotion the peasants display when they utter these 
words” (cited in Bolloten, p. 86). There is some interesting specula¬ 
tion about the backgrounds for the writing of this very important book 
in H. R. Southworth, Le mythe de la croisade de Franco (Ruedo 
Iberico, Paris, 1964; Spanish edition, same publisher, 1963). 

The Communist headquarters in Valencia had on the wall two 
posters: “Respect the property of the small peasant” and “Respect the 
property of the small industrialist” (Borkenau, The Spanish Cockpit, 
p. 117). Actually, it was the rich farmer as well who sought protection 
from the Communists, whom Borkenau describes as constituting the 
extreme right wing of the Republican forces. By early 1937, according 
to Borkenau, the Communist party was “to a large extent ... the party 
of the military and administrative personnel, in the second place the 
party of the petty bourgeoisie and certain well-to-do peasant groups, in 
the third place the party of the employees, and only in the fourth place 
the party of the industrial workers” (p. 192). The party also attracted 
many police and army officers. The police chief in Madrid and the 
chief of intelligence, for example, were party members. In general, the 
party, which had been insignificant before the revolution, “gave the 
urban and rural middle classes a powerful access of life and vigour” as 
it defended them from the revolutionary forces (Bolloten, op. cit., p. 
86). Gerald Brenan describes the situation as follows, in The Spanish 
Labyrinth (1943; reprinted Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 
1960), p. 325: 

Unable to draw to themselves the manual workers, who remained 
firmly fixed in their unions, the Communists found themselves the 
refuge for all those who had suffered from the excesses of the Revolu- 
140 



Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


tion or who feared where it might lead them. Well-to-do Catholic 
orange-growers in Valencia, peasants in Catalonia, small shopkeepers 
and business men, Army officers and Government officials enrolled in 
their ranks. . . . Thus [in Catalonia] one had a strange and novel 
situation: on the one side stood the huge compact proletariat of 
Barcelona with its long revolutionary tradition, and on the other the 
white-collar workers and petite bourgeoisie of the city, organized 
and armed by the Communist party against it. 

Actually, the situation that Brenan describes is not as strange a one 
as he suggests. It is, rather, a natural consequence of Bolshevik elitism 
that the “Red bureaucracy” should act as a counterrevolutionary force 
except under the conditions where its present or future representatives 
are attempting to seize power for themselves, in the name of the 
masses whom they pretend to represent. 

