66. Bolloten, op . cit., p. 189. The legalization of revolutionary actions 
already undertaken and completed recalls the behavior of the “revolu¬ 
tionary vanguard” in the Soviet Union in 1918. Cf. Arthur Rosenberg, 
A History of Bolshevism (1932; republished in translation from the 
original German, New York, Russell and Russell, Publishers, 1965), 
Ch. 6. He describes how the expropriations, “accomplished as the 
result of spontaneous action on the part of workers and against the 
will of the Bolsheviks,” were reluctantly legalized by Lenin months 
later and then placed under central party control. On the relation of 
the Bolsheviks to the anarchists in postrevolutionary Russia, inter¬ 
preted from a pro-anarchist point of view, see Guerin, UAnarchisme, 
pp. 96-125. See also Avrich, op. cit., Part II, pp. 123-254. 

67. Bolloten, op. cit., p. 191. 

68. Ibid., p. 194. 

69. For some details, see Vernon Richards, Lessons of the Spanish 
Revolution (London, Freedom Press, 1953), pp. 83-88. 

70. For a moving eyewitness account, see George Orwell, Homage to 
Catalonia (1938; reprinted New York, Harcourt, Brace & World, 
1952, and Boston, Beacon Press, 1955; quotations in this book from 
Beacon Press edition). This brilliant book received little notice at the 
time of its first publication, no doubt because the picture Orwell drew 
was in sharp conflict with established liberal dogma. The attention that 
it has received as a cold-war document since its republication in 1952 
would, I suspect, have been of little comfort to the author. 

71. Cited by Rocker, The Tragedy of Spain, p. 28. 


141 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


72. See ibid, for a brief review. It was a great annoyance to Hitler that 
these interests were, to a large extent, protected by Franco. 

73. Ibid., p. 35. 

74. Op. cit., pp. 324 f. 

75. Borkenau, The Spa?iish Cockpit, pp. 289-92. It is because of the 
essential accuracy of Borkenau’s account that I think Hobsbawm {op. 
cit.) is quite mistaken in believing that the Communist policy “was 
undoubtedly the only one which could have won the Civil War.” In 
fact, the Communist policy was bound to fail, because it was predi¬ 
cated on the assumption that the Western democracies would join the 
antifascist effort if only Spain could be preserved as, in effect, a 
Western colony. Once the Communist leaders saw the futility of this 
hope, they abandoned the struggle, which was not in their eyes an 
effort to win the Civil War, but only to serve the interests of Russian 
foreign policy. I also disagree with Hobsbawm’s analysis of the 
anarchist revolution, cited earlier, for reasons that are implicit in this 
entire discussion. 

76. Op. cit., pp. 143-44. 

77. Cited by Rosenberg, op. cit., pp. 168-69. 

78. Bolloten, op. cit., p. 84. 

79. Ibid., p. S5. As noted earlier, the “small farmer” included the 
prosperous orange growers, etc. (see note 65). 

80. Brenan, op. cit., p. 321. 

81. Correspondence from Companys to Prieto, 1939. While Com- 
panys, as a Catalonian with separatist impulses, would naturally be 
inclined to defend Catalonian achievements, he was surely not sympa¬ 
thetic to collectivization, despite his cooperative attitude during the 
period when the anarchists, with real power in their hands, permitted 
him to retain nominal authority. I know of no attempt to challenge the 
accuracy of his assessment. Morrow {op. cit., p. 77) quotes the 
Catalonian Premier, the entrepreneur Juan Tarradellas, as defending 
the administration of the collectivized war industries against a Com¬ 
munist (PSUC) attack, which he termed the “most arbitrary false¬ 
hoods.” There are many other reports commenting on the functioning 
of the collectivized industries by nonanarchist firsthand observers, that 
tend to support Companys. For example, the Swiss socialist Andres 
Oltmares is quoted by Rocker {The Tragedy of Spain, p. 24) as saying 
that after the revolution the Catalonian workers’ syndicates “in seven 


142 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


weeks accomplished fully as much as France did in fourteen months 
after the outbreak of the World War.” Continuing, he says: 

In the midst of the civil war the Anarchists have proved themselves 
to be political organizers of the first rank. They kindled in everyone 
the required sense of responsibility, and knew how by eloquent appeals 
to keep alive the spirit of sacrifice for the general welfare of the people. 
