style, differs from that of Alsop in two important respects: first, 
in its skepticism as to the immediacy of an American victory; 
second, in its inability to imagine that any right-thinking Amer¬ 
ican could fail to be in favor of an outright American victory, if 
only it could be achieved by the means now being employed 
(which will, to be sure, turn the country into “a land of ruin 
and wreck”). Thus “we all pray” that American armed might 
will be successful, but the more sophisticated of us doubt that 
Alsop’s prediction will come true. 

Although Schlesinger now insists that “aggression from the 
North” will hardly do as an explanation for the war in South 
Vietnam, the old habits break through in his usage of the term 
“the South Vietnamese.” Thus our goal in Vietnam “should be 
the creation and stabilization of secure areas where the South 
Vietnamese might themselves undertake social and institutional 
development.” In fact, the areas where the South Vietnamese 
themselves have undertaken social and institutional develop¬ 
ment are those where the Vietcong have been in control, for 
example, in large parts of the Mekong Delta prior to the brutal 


301 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


American and South Korean campaigns of the last few months. 
Ample documentation to support this conclusion is presented 
by Douglas Pike (who, in Schlesinger’s judgment, is “the most 
careful student of the Viet Cong”) in his recent book, Viet 
Cong . It would seem, then, that if our goal is to allow the South 
Vietnamese themselves to undertake social and institutional 
development, we should simply withdraw, or at the very least 
permit negotiations among indigenous South Vietnamese forces 
to the exclusion of outside powers, among which, of course, we 
ourselves are dominant by an overwhelming margin. 

But the South Vietnamese that Schlesinger has in mind are 
those whose claim to legitimacy is based on American arms 
(including the “South Vietnamese” in the military junta). Thus, 
in his lexicon, “South Vietnamese” is to be understood rather in 
the manner of the Japanese terminology of a quarter of a cen¬ 
tury ago, in which the “legitimate Chinese government” was 
that of Wang Ching-wei, the puppet ruler whom they installed 
(see page 194 above). The only appropriate comments regard¬ 
ing this conception of Rusk, Schlesinger, et al. are those of the 
American note of December 30, 1938, to Japan, which denied 
“that there is need or warrant for any one Power to take upon 
itself to prescribe what shall be the terms and conditions of a 
‘new order’ in areas not under its sovereignty and to constitute 
itself the repository of authority and the agent of destiny in 
regard thereto.” 

In the same vein, Schlesinger’s “middle course” would offer 
the Vietcong the prospect of participating in the future political 
life of Vietnam, “conditioned on their laying down their arms, 
opening up their territories and abiding by the ground rules of 
free elections.” Since there is no compensating demand that the 
Americans withdraw and that the Saigon army lay down their 
arms and open up their territories, Schlesinger’s middle course, 


302 


The Bitter Heritage 


in essential respects, does not even go as far as the position of 
the Pentagon, which, on the surface at least, commits us to 
withdrawal after “Viet Cong military units would be deac¬ 
tivated.” Either proposal requests only that the other side sur¬ 
render, after which we guarantee them political rights. 

A true “middle course,” demanding capitulation of no faction 
in the civil struggle, would advocate withdrawal of all foreign 
troops (American, South Korean, North Vietnamese, and other 
minor contingents), negotiations among existing political forces 
in South Vietnam—that is, the National Liberation Front and 
whatever other forces still have not been crushed by Marshal 
Ky’s American-supported storm troopers—to form a coalition 
government. As is admitted on all sides, adoption of this middle 
course would lead to the collapse of the Saigon regime, a fact 
which, along with the general unwillingness of the Saigon army 
to fight or even remain in uniform, should lead us, as Schles- 
inger puts it, to “wonder all the more about the political side of 
the war.” 

This course has in fact been repeatedly proposed, by the 
NLF, despite Schlesinger’s blanket assertion that “Hanoi and 
the Viet Cong will not negotiate so long as they think they can 
win.” It is possible that the repeated Hanoi and NLF initiatives 
towards negotiation and their demand for a coalition govern¬ 
ment will prove to be a deception, but there is no doubt that it 
is a deception simply to deny the existence of these initiatives or 
to ignore the content of the NLF program—a program which, 
since 1960, has been calling for the formation of “a broad national 
democratic coalition administration . . . including representatives 
