the proper role for the Thai armed forces is to be prepared to 
cope with limited guerrilla warfare.” 

This exposition of United States policy in Thailand and the 
directions it should take conforms rather well to the general 
lines of pragmatic liberalism as drawn by Hilsman, among oth¬ 
ers. It also indicates clearly the hope that we offer today to the 
•countries on the fringes of Asia. Vietnam may be an aberration. 
Our impact on Thailand, however, can hardly be attributed to 
the politics of inadvertence. 

An interesting sidelight is Darling’s explanation in Thailand 
and the United States of how, in an earlier period, “the Western 
-concept of the rule of law” was disseminated through American 
influence. “Evidence that some officials were obtaining an un¬ 
derstanding of the rule of law was revealed” by the statement 
of a Thai minister who pointed out that “it is essential to the 
prosperity of a nation that it should have fixed laws, and that 
nobles should be restrained from oppressing the people, other¬ 
wise the latter were like chickens, who instead of being kept for 
their eggs, were killed off.” In its international behavior as well, 
the Thai government came to understand the necessity for the 
rule of law: “A growing respect for law was also revealed in the 
adherence of the Thai government to the unequal restrictions 
contained in the treaties with the Western nations in spite of 
the heavy burden they imposed on the finances of the king¬ 
dom.” This is all said without irony. In fact, the examples clarify 
nicely what the “rule of law” means to weak nations, and to the 
exploited in any society. 

Darling, Hilsman, and many others whom I have been dis¬ 
cs 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


cussing represent the moderate liberal wing of scholarship on 
international affairs. It may be useful to sample some of the 
other views that appear in American scholarship. Consider, for 
example, the proposals of Thomas R. Adam, professor of polit¬ 
ical science at New York University . 44 

Adam begins by outlining an “ideal solution” to American 
problems in the Pacific, towards which we should bend our 
efforts. The ideal solution would have the United States recog¬ 
nized as “the responsible military protagonist of all Western 
interests in the area” with a predominant voice in a unified 
Western policy. United States sovereignty over some territorial 
base in the area would give us “ideal conditions for extending 
