efforts and a much smaller and weaker enemy, American politi¬ 
cal scientists were not unreasonable in looking forward to 
greater success. 

So events proceeded through the terrifying decade of the 
1930s. Seeking desperately for allies, Japan joined with Ger¬ 
many and Italy in the Tripartite Pact at a moment when Ger¬ 
many appeared invincible. With the termination of the Japa- 


202 


The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


nese-American commercial treaty in January 1940, Japan turned 
to “other commercial channels/' that is, to plans for occupation 
of French Indochina and the Dutch East Indies, and for gain¬ 
ing “independence" for the Philippines. The expiration of the 
treaty was the turning point that led many moderates towards 
support for the Axis powers. 87 

In July 1940, the United States placed an embargo on avia¬ 
tion fuel, which Japan could obtain from no other source, 88 and 
in September, a total embargo on scrap iron. Meanwhile Amer¬ 
ican aid to China was increasing. In September, the Tripartite 
Pact was signed, and Japanese troops entered northern Indo¬ 
china. The goals were basically two: to block the flow of sup¬ 
plies to Chiang Kai-shek and to take steps towards acquisition 
of petroleum from the Dutch East Indies. On July 2, 1941, a 
decision was made to move troops to southern Indochina. The 
decision was known to the American government, since the 
Japanese diplomatic code had been broken. On July 24, Presi¬ 
dent Roosevelt informed the Japanese ambassador that if Japan 
would refrain from this step, he would use his influence to 
achieve the neutralization of Indochina. This message did not 
reach the Japanese Foreign Ministry until July 27. On July 26, 
Japan announced publicly its plans to move troops to southern 
Indochina and the United States government ordered all Japa¬ 
nese assets in the United States to be frozen. 89 On August 1, a 
total embargo of oil was announced by the United States. At 
this point, “Japan was denied access to all the vitally needed 
supplies outside her own control." 90 

What slender hope there now remained to avoid war lay in 
the Hull-Nomura talks, which had been under way since Feb¬ 
ruary. The nature of these talks has been a matter of some 
dispute. Pal points out that the American position hardened 
noticeably in the course of the discussions, with respect to all 


203 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


major issues . 91 The United States insisted on making the Axis 
alliance a major issue, though Japan persistently de-emphasized 
it. Schroeder argues that the American motive was in part “sell¬ 
ing the anticipated war with Japan to the American people/' 
who might not “agree that an attack on non-American soil—on 
Thailand, Malaya, Singapore, or the Netherlands East Indies— 
constituted an attack on the United States ." 92 It may be that 
the underlying motive was to justify the forthcoming American 
involvement in the European war. In any event, the American 
terms, by November, were such that Japan would have had to 
abandon totally its attempt to secure “special interests" of the 
sort possessed by the United States and Britain in the areas 
under their domination, as well as its alliance with the Axis 
powers, becoming a mere “subcontractor" in the emerging 
American world system. Japan chose war—as we now know, 
with no expectation of victory over the United States but in the 
hope “that the Americans, confronted by a German victory in 
Europe and weary of war in the Pacific, would agree to a 
negotiated peace in which Japan would be recognized as the 
dominant power in Eastern Asia ." 93 

On November 7, 1941, Japan offered to accept “the principle 
of nondiscrimination in commercial relations" in the Pacific, in¬ 
cluding China, if this principle “were adopted throughout the 
world." The qualification was, needless to say, quite unthinka¬ 
ble. Hulks final demand was that the principle be applied in the 
Japanese occupied areas and that Japan withdraw all forces 
from China and Indochina. The Western powers could not be 
expected to respond in kind in their dominions. A few days later 
came “the day that will live in infamy." 

This final exchange points clearly to what had been, for dec¬ 
ades, the central problem. Japan had insisted that in its plans 
for “coprosperity" and then a “new order," it was simply follow- 


204 


