
14. “America in the Technetronic Age,” Encounter , Vol. 30 (January 
1968), pp. 16-26. 

15. “Marxian Socialism in the United States,” in Donald D. Egbert 
and S. Persons, eds., Socialism and American Life (Princeton, N.J., 
Princeton University Press, 1952), Vol. 1, p. 329. 

16. Op. cit., p. 5. Less typical, and more realistic, is his belief that 
these problems also “seem to defy the social scientist’s expertise.” For 
some general discussions of this “generosity,” see, for example, David 
Horowitz, Hemispheres North and South (Baltimore, The Johns Hop¬ 
kins Press, 1966), and many special studies. American public officials 
do not share this faith in our generosity, by and large. For example, 
the Assistant Secretary of State for Latin American affairs observed 
128 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


bluntly that “the State Department is not disposed to favor large loans 
of public funds to countries not welcoming our private capital” ( State 
Department Bulletin No. 22, 1950, cited in Frederick Clairmonte, 
Economic Liberalism and Underdevelopment [Bombay and London, 
Asia Publishing House, 1960], p. 248). Eugene Black, testifying be¬ 
fore Congress on the Asian Development Bank, pointed out that 
“when the Bank makes loans you have international bids, and I am 
sure that with our ability and ingenuity in this country, we will get our 
share of the business. We certainly ought to get more than the small 
amount we contribute.” David Bell testified that “the Bank will play a 
major role in carrying forward another policy of our own assistance 
program—strengthening the role of the private sector ... by identify¬ 
ing particular projects which can attract private capital, by helping to 
draw up development plans and stimulate policies which will en¬ 
courage private initiative, and by drawing private capital to the re¬ 
gion.” Nothing here about “the generosity that characterizes our pol¬ 
icy.” 

Equally revealing is the history of programs such as the Alliance for 
Progress. As Senator Gore commented, this program “has in large 
measure come to be a subsidy for American business and American 
exporters” ( Congressional Record, July 22, 1966)—a fairly accurate 
judgment, so it appears. For example, the AID lending program in 
Latin America, according to former Alliance for Progress official Wil¬ 
liam Rogers ( The Twilight Struggle [New York, Random House, 
1967], p. 205), is based on two elements: “a demonstrated balance of 
payments needed to increase the nation’s ability to import U.S. goods 
and services, and the adoption of public policies and programs which 
would insure against capital flight on the international account side or 
