cies: strengthening the Western alliance and rearming Ger¬ 
many, expanding the nuclear arsenal, stemming popular revolu¬ 
tions in the Third World and subverting or strangling those that 
had taken place. Similarly, it is not easy to convince oneself that 
the director of the CIA, Allen Dulles, really believed that Mos¬ 
sadegh was willfully “creating a Communist state,” or that Assis¬ 
tant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Thomas Mann 
was so woefully ignorant of world affairs as to suppose that the 
Dominican revolution in 1965 resulted from the machinations of 
a “Sino-Soviet military bloc.” Rather, one must adapt to current 
styles of acceptable international behavior. It would not do to 
use today the phraseology of Secretary of State Philander Knox, 
who sent marines into Cuba in 1908 saying that “the United 
States does not undertake first to consult the Cuban Government 
if a crisis arises requiring a temporary landing somewhere.” And 
in general, the “international Communist conspiracy” is a perfect 
propaganda device to justify actions that reinforce and extend 
American hegemony, serving our aims just as “bourgeois influ¬ 
ence and American scheming” serve those of Russian imperial¬ 
ism. In both cases there is, of course, a background of fact that 


258 



The Logic of Withdrawal 


gives a superficial plausibility to the fabrications of the propa¬ 
gandist. 

Similarly, I think that Zinn does not go far enough in analyz¬ 
ing the justification for the war given by the dissatisfied liberals, 
a very important matter if one hopes to construct a domestic 
political base for a policy of disengagement in Vietnam, or 
more generally, for a significant reorientation of American in¬ 
ternational behavior away from the policy of repression and 
“restructuring” on American terms, disguised as “anti-Commu- 
nism” and “preservation of order.” I have already given a num¬ 
ber of illustrations of the ideological blinders that must be re¬ 
moved before sensible discussion can even begin. Others can 
easily be added. 

Consider, for example, Richard Goodwin’s essay, cited in 
note 47. Goodwin constructs a powerful argument against the 
war, but concludes nevertheless that the war is ultimately justi¬ 
fied, in part on grounds of American self-interest, in part be¬ 
cause of the necessity for “protecting Asia from dominion or 
conquest by a hostile power.” As to the first, “the bedrock vital 
interest of the United States,” which must serve as the “single 
standard” against which any step in policy making must be 
tested, is “to establish that American military power, once 
committed to defend another nation, cannot be driven from the 
field”—even if, as in the case in question, an American with¬ 
drawal would be in the face of an “enemy” that is largely in¬ 
digenous. 70 If we generalize this “bedrock vital interest” to 
other great powers, the outlook for the future is dim. The Soviet 
Union, for example, could have used this argument to justify its 
military intervention in Hungary (in support of what it re¬ 
garded as the legitimate government, against rebels incited 
from the outside and including fascist elements, etc.), or to 


259 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


maintain its missiles in Cuba (there to defend against American 
invasion), in which case we would not now be discussing Viet¬ 
nam or anything else. 

Still more interesting, however, is the second argument: that 
we must protect Asia from dominion or conquest by a hostile 
power. I will not dwell on the fact that all reputable authorities 
agree that the Vietnamese are strongly anti-Chinese, 71 so that if 
we were really interested in containing Chinese expansionism, 
we should presumably be supporting Ho Chi Minh, along with 
all popular, indigenous forces on the border of China, whatever 
their domestic character. What seems to me most revealing, 
however, is the reason that Goodwin cites as underlying our 
commitment to protect Asia from outside force. It is “the almost 
idealistic, compelling conviction that the one nation with the 
power to prevent it should not stand aside while nations unwill¬ 
ingly submit to foreign domination.” Thus we must not “un¬ 
dermine the central world purpose of the United States—the 
creation of an international order of independent states.” It 
does not occur to him that by suppressing a victorious insurrec¬ 
tion, we are precisely undermining this “central world purpose” 
and forcing a nation to “submit to foreign domination.” Nor 
does he take note of the fact that we are unable to form a 
puppet government with even the legitimacy of those set up by 
Germany and Japan—we have not, for example, been able to 
find a national figure of the stature of Petain or Wang Ching- 
wei to mask our aggression. This sentimental faith in American 
