results of this corruption. It comments on the successful attack 
by a guerrilla force on the province capital of Quang Tri on 
April 6, and continues: “A few days later, in a series of events 
that were not fully reported at the time, [the guerrillas] moved 
virtually unmolested into Hue while the army and the national 
police fled”—a remarkable event, its significance indicated by 
the fact that it was kept from the American people at the time 
and still has not been frankly discussed. 

In Saigon itself there are clear indications of the same 
demoralization or widespread involvement in guerrilla activi¬ 
ties. For example, on February 13, 1967, Westmoreland’s head¬ 
quarters in central Saigon were subjected to a mortar attack. As 


225 


*= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


the New York Times points out, with considerable understate¬ 
ment, this attack “gives rise to a question of the popular support 
in Saigon for the South Vietnamese government. ... It seemed 
unlikely to observers that the 81mm. mortar and the shells 
could have been transported to the house, that the roof could 
have been cut and the weapon set up without detection by 
someone in the crowded residential district. Until the shells 
were fired . . . , no one called the police.” 

Current reports confirm, once again, that “every program to 
win the allegiance of the countryside for the South Vietnamese 
government has so far failed, in the opinion of most observers. 
To this day, 80% of the peasantry . . . falls under Vietcong 
influence if not outright control.” 7 The very terminology of this 
report gives some insight into the reasons for the recurrent 
failure; it has yet to be demonstrated that the Americans are 
correct in their unquestioned assumption that the peasants of 
Vietnam are objects, incapable of political expression or alle¬ 
giance, to be “controlled” by one side or the other. The report 
continues: “If the South Vietnamese themselves cannot achieve 
support for the government among their own people, it is un¬ 
likely that ‘giant white foreigners’ will be able to do this for 
them.” Yet it is just this attempt to which we are now reduced, 
with the military takeover. And we can be fairly sure that this 
latest step will lead to new and glorious reports of success, 
before the next rude awakening. 

The Saigon government has few illusions as to its legitimacy 
and status. Saigon officials have pointed out repeatedly that 
they cannot survive in an open political arena, and that there¬ 
fore the Americans must destroy not only the Vietcong military 
units but also its political and administrative structure, by such 
devices as the “pacification” program. A clear and forthright 
expression of this analysis appears in an interview with “one of 


226 



The Logic of Withdrawal 


the top generals in the junta, a man regarded by U.S. officials as 
politically the most sophisticated of the group/’ reported by 
George M. Kahin in a memorandum to a group of senators. 8 
The general describes the situation in the following terms: 

To defeat the communists we must win against them both politi¬ 
cally and militarily. But we are very weak politically and without 
the strong political support of the population which the NLF 
have. Thus now if we defeat them militarily, they can come to 
power because of their greater political strength. We now have 
(thanks to the support of our Allies) a strong military instru¬ 
ment. But we are without a political instrument that can compete 
with the communists in the south. Such a political instrument we 
must now begin to create, a process that will take a generation. It 
is unrealistic to speak of a cease fire until after we have built up 
our political strength to the point where we can compete with the 
communists successfully. 

He goes on to say that the war must be carried to North Viet¬ 
nam, with the commitment of a million American troops, then 
probably to China as well. Finally, he argues that “it might be 
necessary to move on to World War III so as to insure that 
communist power was fully removed from Vietnam,” a not 
unrealistic forecast, if the United States continues to insist that 
its proteges be spared the defeat that they know to be a cer¬ 
tainty if the struggle is ever permitted to shift to the political 
arena, where they lack “the strong political support of the popu¬ 
lation which the NLF have.” 

Buddhist leaders appear to share this analysis. In the cited 
memorandum, Kahin quotes Buddhist spokesmen, obviously 
unidentified, who point out that the present Saigon regime, 
dependent for its life on United States support, can do nothing 
