
The Logic of Withdrawal 


What is important in such statements as this is not the under¬ 
current of racism—though that is bad enough—but rather the 
notion that we are “easy prey” to these yellow dwarves with 
their pocket knives. Obviously, we are “easy prey” to them only 
in their countries, where we have a perfect right to be. 

Why do we have this right? The answer has been given by 
many statesmen and scholars: It is in our national interest. 
President Johnson has expressed the matter quite clearly on 
occasion, for example, in the following statement (November 2, 
1966): 

There are three billion people in the world and we have only 200 
million of them. We are outnumbered 15 to one. If might did 
make right they would sw T eep over the United States and take 
what we have. We have what they want. 

Consequently, “we are going to have to stand and say: 'Might 
doesn't make right' ”—as we are doing in South Vietnam, for 
example. Or in Guatemala, where according to Guatemalan 
Vice-President Marroquin Rojas, “American planes based in 
Panama take part in military operations in Guatemala” in which 
“napalm is frequently used in zones suspected of serving as 
refuge for the rebels.'' 58 

When President Johnson pleads that we are defending our¬ 
selves against a superior force, that we must stand in Vietnam 
or else they will “sweep over the United States and take what 
we have,” he is, unfortunately, representing a substantial, prob¬ 
ably dominant body of American opinion. To us today, it may 
seem difficult to understand how it could be seriously believed, 
thirty years ago, that a Jewish-Bolshevik conspiracy was threat¬ 
ening the survival of Germany, the bearer of the spiritual values 
of Western civilization. 59 To others today, it may be equally 
difficult to take seriously the picture of the strongest, richest 
nation on earth cowering in terror behind its missiles and nu- 


249 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


clear warheads, in fear that “what we have” will be taken away 
if w T e allow a tiny country halfway around the world to follow 
its own course in freedom from American domination. Never¬ 
theless, this characterization is no caricature. People in the so- 
called “peace movement” have a tendency to regard Lyndon 
Johnson as an illegitimate usurper who does not represent the 
mainstream of American opinion. They are probably deluding 
themselves. Statements such as those just quoted may very well 
reflect prevailing American attitudes, and one who wishes to 
think realistically about the American imperial role would do 
w r ell to bear this in mind—as he should bear in mind the fact 
that this is a country in which a leading liberal commentator, 
after all that has happened in the past three years, can describe 
the American war in Vietnam in these terms: 

[America] is fighting a war now on the principle that military 
power shall not compel South Vietnam to do what it does not 
want to do, that man does not belong to the state. This is the 
deepest conviction of Western Civilization, and rests on the old 
doctrine that the individual belongs not to the state but to his 
Creator, and therefore has “inalienable rights” as a person, which 
no magistrate or political force may violate. 60 

As I have just pointed out, we are not the first nation to have 
seen itself as fighting to defend the “deepest convictions of 
Western civilization.” When James Reston, with the access to 
information that he has, can seriously contend that we have been 
fighting to preserve the inalienable rights of the people of Viet¬ 
nam against “military power” or “political force,” we can see 
w T hat a long road lies ahead before there is any hope that this 
country will recover its political sanity. 

The colonialist mentality that colors the American perception 
of the Vietnam war is strikingly evident in the reactions of those 
who are turning against the war as its monstrous character 


250 



The Logic of Withdrawal 


becomes too plain to hide. Several months ago, for example, the 
top leaders of the International Voluntary Services resigned— 
some after almost a decade of work in Vietnamese villages— 
“because they believed that our military action was proving 
counterproductive, and threatened to alienate the majority of 
