

The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


a conflict between two groups of powers for survival and domina¬ 
tion. One set of powers, which includes Britain and the United 
States, and perhaps “free” France, controls some 70% of the 
earth’s resources and thirty million square miles of territory. The 
imperialistic status quo thus to their advantage was achieved by a 
series of wars including the last one. All they ask now is to be left 
at peace, and if so they are disposed to make their rule mild 
though firm. ... On the other hand stands a group of powers, such 
as Germany, Italy, Hungary, Japan, controlling about 15% of 
the earth’s resources and one million square miles of territory, 
equally determined to alter the situation in their own favor, to 
impose their ideas of “order,” and armed to the teeth to do that, 
even if it means plunging the whole world into war. 7 

He foresaw that an Allied victory would yield “a new American 
empire” incorporating a subservient Britain, “that we shall be 
the next nation to seek world domination—in other words, to do 
what we condemn Hitler for trying to do.” In the disordered 
postwar world, we shall be told, he predicts, that “our only 
safety lies in making or keeping ourselves ‘impregnable.’ But 
that . . . means being able to decide by preponderance of mili¬ 
tary might any international issue that may arise—which would 
put us in the position in which Hitler is trying to put Germany.” 
In a later essay, he quotes this remark: “The problem after a 
war is with the victor. He thinks he has just proved that war 
and violence pay. Who will now teach him a lesson?” 8 

The prediction that the United States would emerge as the 
world-dominant power was political realism; to forecast that it 
would act accordingly, having achieved this status by force, was 
no less realistic. This tragedy might be averted, Muste urged, 
by a serious attempt at peaceful reconciliation with no attempt 
to fasten sole war-guilt on any nation, assurance to all peoples 
of equitable access to markets and essential materials, arma¬ 
ment reduction, massive economic rehabilitation, and moves 
towards international federation. To the American ideologist of 


165 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 
