

114 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


The fact that is concealed by the coalition of the Spanish Com¬ 
munist Party with the left Republicans and right wing Socialists is 
that there has been a successful social revolution in half of Spain. 
Successful, that is, in the collectivization of factories and farms 
which are operated under trade union control, and operated quite 
efficiently. During the three months that I was director of propa¬ 
ganda for the United States and England under Alvarez del Vayo, 
then Foreign Minister for the Valencia Government, I was in¬ 
structed not to send out one word about this revolution in the 
economic system of loyalist Spain. Nor are any foreign corre¬ 
spondents in Valencia permitted to write freely of the revolution 
that has taken place . 123 

In short, there is much reason to believe that the will to fight 
Franco was significantly diminished, perhaps destroyed, by the 
policy of authoritarian centralization undertaken by the liberal- 
Communist coalition, carried through by force, and disguised in 
the propaganda that was disseminated among Western intel¬ 
lectuals 124 and that still dominates the writing of history. To 
the extent that this is a correct judgment, the alternative pro¬ 
posed by Berneri and the left “extremists” gains in plausi¬ 
bility. 

As noted earlier, Caballero and the anarchist ministers ac¬ 
cepted the policy of counterrevolution because of their trust in 
the Western democracies, which they felt sure would sooner or 
later come to their aid. This feeling was perhaps understanda¬ 
ble in 1937. It is strange, however, that a historian writing in 
the 1960s should dismiss the proposal to strike at Franco’s rear 
by extending the revolutionary war to Morocco, on grounds 
that this would have displeased Western capitalism (see page 
110 above). 

Berneri was quite right in his belief that the Western democ¬ 
racies would not take part in an antifascist struggle in Spain. In 
fact, their complicity in the fascist insurrection was not slight. 


115 


*= AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 
