
Western economic policies of the 1930s made an intolerable 
situation still worse, as was reported regularly in the confer¬ 
ences of the Institute of Pacific Relations (IPR). The report of 
the Banff conference of August 1933 noted that “the Indian 
Government, in an attempt to foster its own cotton industry, 
imposed an almost prohibitive tariff on imported cotton goods, 
the effects of which were of course felt chiefly by Japanese 
traders, whose markets in India had been growing rapidly.” 59 
“Japan, which is a rapidly growing industrial nation, has a spe¬ 
cial need for . . . [mineral resources] . . . and is faced with a 
serious shortage of iron, steel, oil, and a number of important 
industrial minerals under her domestic control, while, on the 
other hand, the greater part of the supplies of tin and rubber, 
not only of the Pacific area but for the whole world, are, by 
historical accident, largely under the control of Great Britain 
and the Netherlands.” 60 The same was true of iron and oil, of 
course. In 1932, Japanese exports of cotton piece-goods for the 
first time exceeded those of Great Britain. The Indian tariff, 
mentioned above, w T as 75 percent on Japanese cotton goods and 
25 percent on British goods. The Ottawa conference of 1932 
effectively blocked Japanese trade with the Commonwealth, in¬ 
cluding India. As the IPR conference report noted, “Ottawa had 
dealt a blow to Japanese liberalism.” 

The Ottawa Commonwealth arrangements aimed at con¬ 
structing an essentially closed, autarchic system; the contem¬ 
porary American policy of self-sufficiency proceeded in a similar 
direction. The only recourse available to Japan was to try to 
mimic this behavior in Manchuria. Liberalism was all very well 
when Britannia ruled the waves, but p not when Lancashire in- 


190 



The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


dustry was grinding to a halt, unable to meet Japanese competi¬ 
tion. The Open Door policy was appropriate to an expanding 
capitalist economy, but must not be allowed to block American 
economic recovery. Thus in October 1935, Japan was forced to 
accept an agreement limiting shipments of cotton textiles from 
Japan to the Philippines for two years, while American imports 
remained duty-free. Similarly, revised commercial arrange¬ 
ments with Cuba in 1934 were designed to eliminate Japanese 
competition in textiles, copper wire, electric bulbs, and cello¬ 
phane. 61 
