

Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


arming the peasants to defend their own communities.” If we 
rarely reach the third stage, this is because we have not yet 
learned to “share the sense of urgency of the revolutionary 
cause,” or “to nourish these attitudes” among our “Vietnamese 
associates.” Thus we understand that the “real revolution” is the 
one we are implementing, “in contrast to the artificially stimu¬ 
lated and controlled revolution of Diem and the Communists,” 
but we have difficulties in communicating this fact to the Viet¬ 
namese peasant or to our “Vietnamese associates.” What is 
needed, clearly, is better training for American officials, and of 
course, true national dedication to this humanitarian task. 

A grave defect in our society, this political scientist argues, is 
our tendency to avoid “an active American role in the fostering 
of democratic institutions abroad.” The pacification program in 
Vietnam represents an attempt to meet our responsibility to 
foster democratic institutions abroad, through rational methods 
of material and human resources control. Refusal to dedicate 
ourselves to this task might be described as “a policy more 
selfish and timid than it was broad and enlightened,” 23 to use 
the terminology of an earlier day. 

When we strip away the terminology of the behavioral sci¬ 
ences, we see revealed, in such work as this, the mentality of 
the colonial civil servant, persuaded of the benevolence of the 
mother country and the correctness of its vision of world order, 
and convinced that he understands the true interests of the 
backward peoples whose welfare he is to administer. In fact, 
much of the scholarly work on Southeast Asian affairs reflects 
precisely this mentality. As an example, consider the August 
1967 issue of Asian Survey, fully devoted to a Vietnam 
symposium in which a number of experts contribute their 
thoughts on the success of our enterprise and how it can be 
moved forward. 


41 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


The introductory essay by Samuel Huntington, chairman of 
the department of government at Harvard, is entitled “Social 
Science and Vietnam.” It emphasizes the need “to develop 
scholarly study and understanding of Vietnam” if our “involve¬ 
ment” is to succeed, and expresses his judgment that the papers 
in this volume “demonstrate that issues and topics closely con¬ 
nected to policy can be presented and analyzed in scholarly and 
objective fashion.” 

Huntington’s own contribution to “scholarly study and under¬ 
standing of Vietnam” includes an article in the Boston Globe, 
February 17, 1968. Here he describes the “momentous changes 
in Vietnamese society during the past five years,” specifically, 
the process of urbanization. This process “struck directly at the 
strength and potential appeal of the Viet Cong.” “So long as the 
overwhelming mass of the people lived in the countryside, the 
VC could win the war by winning control of those people—and 
they came very close to doing so in both 1961 and 1964. But the 
American sponsored urban revolution undercut the VC rural 
revolution.” The refugees fleeing from the rural areas found not 
only security but also “prosperity and economic well-being.” 
“While wartime urban prosperity hurt some, the mass of the 
poor people benefited from it.” 

The sources of urbanization have been described clearly 
many times, for example, by this American spokesman in Viet¬ 
nam: “There have been three choices open to the peasantry. 
One, to stay where they are; two, to move into the areas con¬ 
trolled by us; three, to move off into the interior towards the 
Vietcong. . . . Our operations have been designed to make the 
first choice impossible, the second attractive, and to reduce the 
likelihood of anyone choosing the third to zero.” 24 The benefits 
accruing to the newly urbanized elements have also been amply 
described in the press, for example, by James Doyle of the 


42 



Objectivity and Libera! Scholarship 


Globe, February 22, 1968: Saigon “is a rich city, the bar own¬ 
ers, B-girls, money changers and black marketeers all making 
their fortunes while it lasts. It is a poor city, with hundreds of 
thousands of refugees crammed into thatched huts and tin- 
roofed shacks, more than two million people shoehorned into 21 
square miles.” Or Neil Sheehan, in a classic and often-quoted 
article (New York Times, October 9, 1966): 

A drive through Saigon demonstrates another fashion in which 
the social system works. Virtually all the new construction con¬ 
