contents of this article and the conclusions that Sheehan ex¬ 
presses. But there is a more important point that has received 
very little attention. Sheehan begins his account by saying that 
when he arrived in Vietnam he 

believed in what my country was doing in Vietnam. With military 
and economic aid and a few thousand pilots and Army advisers, 
the United States was attempting to help the non-Communist 
Vietnamese build a viable and independent nation-state and de¬ 
feat a Communist guerrilla insurgency that would subject them to 
a dour tyranny. 


246 



The Logic of Withdrawal 


He is disillusioned only because of the devastating conse¬ 
quences, for Vietnam and its people, to which this attempt led. 
But he still does not question that we had a perfect right to use 
military force to determine the structure of South Vietnamese 
society and to defeat an insurgent movement which we had 
decided “would subject them to a dour tyranny. 55 There is no 
aggressor in history who could not have provided a similar 
“justification 55 for his actions—and many have offered precisely 
such justifications. The assumption that we have the right to 
impose our will on the Vietnamese (in their best interests, of 
course) is almost unchallenged. It is for this reason that one 
cannot be too hopeful about the prospects of reaching liberal 
American opinion in any fundamental way, on the central issues 
of war and peace, freedom, and national self-determination. 

There are few who challenge the assumption that we have a 
perfect right to determine the legitimate elements in South 
Vietnamese society, or to use force to impose the social and 
political institutions that we, in our wisdom and benevolence, 
have selected for South Vietnam—so long as this attempt is not 
too costly to make it worthwhile. The spectrum of “responsible 55 
opinion extends from those who proclaim openly that we have 
this right to those who formulate our goals in a way that pre¬ 
supposes it. As to the latter, consider the final report to Con¬ 
gress by Defense Secretary McNamara, probably as sane a 
voice as one is likely to hear in Washington these days. We are 
fighting in Vietnam, he says, “to preserve the principle that 
political change must not be brought about by externally di¬ 
rected violence and military force. 55 But it is, in his view, per¬ 
fectly legitimate for “externally directed violence and military 
force 55 to be employed to guarantee political stability—that is, 
when it is the United States that exercises this force. In fact, he 


247 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


goes still further. We even have the right to use our military 
force to carry out political and social change. Thus the pacifica¬ 
tion program, which is under American military control, 
“involves nothing less than the restructuring of Vietnamese soci¬ 
ety,” but it is, in his view, a legitimate, in fact laudable pro¬ 
gram. 56 Thus the principle that we are fighting to preserve is 
not the principle of nonintervention by military force in the 
affairs of other nations. Rather, it is the principle that the 
United States, and the United States alone, may intervene in 
the internal affairs of other nations to guarantee political sta¬ 
bility and even to restructure their society. Secretary Mc¬ 
Namara is of course aware of the fact that the role of North 
Vietnam in “externally directed violence” has always been, and 
now remains, far slighter than our own; it is the department that 
he headed—the Department of Defense—that has provided most 
of the evidence on this matter. But North Vietnamese inter¬ 
ference has been in support of social change of a sort that we 
define as illegitimate, whereas ours is in support of stability 
(or occasionally, restructuring) that we have determined to be 
quite proper. To be concise, we are fighting in Vietnam in ful¬ 
fillment of our role as international judge and executioner— 
nothing less. 

Secretary McNamara’s formulation of our goals in Vietnam is 
given in calm and measured tones and is for this reason decep¬ 
tively reassuring. With less subtlety, the same presuppositions 
are expressed in the words of a congressman from Texas, 
twenty years ago: 

No matter what else we have of offensive or defensive weapons, 
without superior air power America is a bound and throttled 
giant; impotent and easy prey to any yellow dwarf with a pocket 
knife. 67 


248 

