late, but it seems to me that many commentators have seriously 
underestimated the significance of the political factor, the po¬ 
tential strength of a popular struggle to defend the achieve¬ 
ments of the revolution. It is perhaps relevant that Asturias, the 
one area of Spain where the system of CNT-UGT committees 
was not eliminated in favor of central control, is also the one 
area where guerrilla warfare continued well after Franco’s vic¬ 
tory. Broue and Temime observe 111 that the resistance of the 
partisans of Asturias “demonstrates the depth of the revolution¬ 
ary elan, which had not been shattered by the reinstitution of 
state authority, conducted here with greater prudence.” There 
can be no doubt that the revolution was both widespread and 
deeply rooted in the Spanish masses. It seems quite possible 
that a revolutionary war of the sort advocated by Berneri would 


111 


*— — 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


have been successful, despite the greater military force of the 
fascist armies. The idea that men can overcome machines no 
longer seems as romantic or naive as it may have a few years 
ago. 

Furthermore, the trust placed in the bourgeois government 
by the anarchist leaders was not honored, as the history of the 
counterrevolution clearly shows. In retrospect, it seems that 
Berneri was correct in arguing that they should not have taken 
part in the bourgeois government, but should rather have 
sought to replace this government with the institutions created 
by the revolution . 112 The anarchist minister Garcia Oliver 
stated that “we had confidence in the word and in the person of 
a Catalan democrat and retained and supported Companys as 
President of the Generalitat ,” 113 at a time when in Catalonia, 
at least, the workers’ organizations could easily have replaced 
the state apparatus and dispensed with the former political 
parties, as they had replaced the old economy with an entirely 
new structure. Companys recognized fully that there were lim¬ 
its beyond which he could not cooperate with the anarchists. In 
an interview with H. E. Kaminski, he refused to specify these 
limits, but merely expressed his hope that “the anarchist masses 
will not oppose the good sense of their leaders,” who have 
“accepted the responsibilities incumbent upon them”; he saw 
his task as “directing these responsibilities in the proper path,” 
not further specified in the interview, but shown by the events 
leading up to the May Days . 114 Probably, Companys’ attitude 
towards this willingness of the anarchist leaders to cooperate 
was expressed accurately in his reaction to the suggestion of a 
correspondent of the New Statesman and Nation , who pre¬ 
dicted that the assassination of the anarchist mayor of Puig- 
cerda would lead to a revolt: “[Companys] laughed scornfully 
and said the anarchists would capitulate as they always had 


112 



Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


before/’ 115 As has already been pointed out in some detail, the 
liberal-Communist Party coalition had no intention of letting 
the war against Franco take precedence over the crushing of 
the revolution. A spokesman for Comorera put the matter 
clearly: “This slogan has been attributed to the P.S.U.C.: 'Be¬ 
fore taking Saragossa, it is necessary to take Barcelona.’ This 
reflects the situation exactly. . . .” 116 Comorera himself had, 
from the beginning, pressed Companys to resist the CNT. 117 
The first task of the antifascist coalition, he maintained, was 
to dissolve the revolutionary committees. 118 I have already 
cited a good deal of evidence indicating that the repression 
conducted by the Popular Front seriously weakened popular 
commitment and involvement in the antifascist war. What was 
evident to George Orwell was also clear to the Barcelona work¬ 
ers and the peasants in the collectivized villages of Aragon: the 
liberal-Communist coalition would not tolerate a revolutionary 
transformation of Spanish society; it would commit itself fully 
to the anti-Franco struggle only after the old order was firmly 
re-established, by force, if necessary. 119 

There is little doubt that farm workers in the collectives un¬ 
derstood quite well the social content of the drive towards con¬ 
solidation and central control. We learn this not only from an¬ 
archist sources but also from the socialist press in the spring of 
1937. On May 1, the Socialist party newspaper Adelante had 
the following to say: 

At the outbreak of the Fascist revolt the labor organizations and 
the democratic elements in the country were in agreement that 
the so-called Nationalist Revolution, which threatened to plunge 
our people into an abyss of deepest misery, could be halted only 
by a Social Revolution. The Communist Party, however, opposed 
this view with all its might. It had apparently completely forgot¬ 
