73 


-• AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

argued, could solve the thousand problems of social reconstruc¬ 
tion and produce the spiritual transformation that is the essence 
of a true social revolution. As Bolshevik practice hardened into 
dogma, the fear of popular initiative and spontaneous mass 
action, not under the direction and control of the properly des¬ 
ignated vanguard, became a dominant element of so-called 
“Communist” ideology. 

Antagonism to mass movements and to social change that 
escapes the control of privileged elites is also a prominent fea¬ 
ture of contemporary liberal ideology. 53 Expressed as foreign 
policy, it takes the form described earlier. To conclude this 
discussion of counterrevolutionary subordination, I would like 
to investigate how, in one rather crucial case, this particular 
bias in American liberal ideology can be detected even in the 
interpretation of events of the past in which American involve¬ 
ment was rather slight, and in historical work of very high 
caliber. 

In 1966, the American Historical Association gave its biennial 
award for the most outstanding work on European history to 
Gabriel Jackson, for his study of Spain in the 1930s. 54 There is 
no question that of the dozens of books on this period, Jackson’s 
is among the best, and I do not doubt that the award was well 
deserved. The Spanish Civil War is one of the crucial events of 
modern history, and one of the most extensively studied as well. 
In it, we find the interplay of forces and ideas that have domin¬ 
ated European history since the industrial revolution. What is 
more, the relationship of Spain to the great powers was in many 
respects like that of the countries of what is now called the 
Third World. In some ways, then, the events of the Spanish 
Civil War give a foretaste of what the future may hold, as Third 
World revolutions uproot traditional societies, threaten imperial 
dominance, exacerbate great-power rivalries, and bring the world 


74 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


perilously close to a war which, if not averted, will surely be the 
final catastrophe of modern history. My reason for wanting to 
investigate an outstanding liberal analysis of the Spanish Civil 
War is therefore twofold: first, because of the intrinsic interest 
of these events; and second, because of the insight that this 
analysis may provide with respect to the underlying elitist bias 
which I believe to be at the root of the phenomenon of counter¬ 
revolutionary subordination. 

In his study of the Spanish Republic, Jackson makes no at¬ 
tempt to hide his own commitment in favor of liberal democ¬ 
racy, as represented by such figures as Azana, Casares Quiroga, 
Martinez Barrio, 55 and the other “responsible national leaders.” 
In taking this position, he speaks for much of liberal scholar¬ 
ship ; it is fair to say that figures similar to those just mentioned 
would be supported by American liberals, were this possible, in 
Latin America, Asia, or Africa. Furthermore, Jackson makes 
little attempt to disguise his antipathy towards the forces of 
popular revolution in Spain, or their goals. 

It is no criticism of Jackson’s study that his point of view and 
sympathies are expressed with such clarity. On the contrary, the 
value of this work as an interpretation of historical events is 
enhanced by the fact that the author’s commitments are made 
so clear and explicit. But I think it can be shown that Jackson’s 
account of the popular revolution that took place in Spain is 
misleading and in part quite unfair, and that the failure of 
objectivity it reveals is highly significant in that it is character¬ 
istic of the attitude taken by liberal (and Communist) intellec¬ 
tuals towards revolutionary movements that are largely sponta¬ 
neous and only loosely organized, while rooted in deeply felt 
needs and ideals of dispossessed masses. It is a convention of 
scholarship that the use of such terms as those of the preceding 
phrase demonstrates naivete and muddle-headed sentimental- 


75 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


ity. The convention, however, is supported by ideological con¬ 
viction rather than history or investigation of the phenomena of 
social life. This conviction is, I think, belied by such events as 
the revolution that swept over much of Spain in the summer of 
1936. 

The circumstances of Spain in the 1930s are not duplicated 
elsewhere in the underdeveloped world today, to be sure. Nev¬ 
