
The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


corporate certain indigenous Chinese moves towards autonomy. 
“In the period immediately preceding the Manchurian Affair, a 
group of Chinese under the leadership of Chang Ku also at¬ 
tempted to create an autonomous Manchuria based on coopera¬ 
tion of its six largest ethnic groups (Japanese, Chinese, 
Russians, Mongolians, Koreans, and Manchurians) in order to 
protect the area from Japanese, Chinese and Soviet encroach¬ 
ment” (p. 40). The governing bodies set up by the Kwantung 
Army 

were led by prominent Chinese with Japanese support. Reorgani¬ 
zation of local administrative organs was undertaken by utilizing 
the traditional self-governing bodies. . . . Yu Chung-han, a prom¬ 
inent elder statesman of the Mukden Government, . . . was . . . 
installed as chief of the Self-Government Guiding Board on No¬ 
vember 10. Yu had been the leader of the civilian group in 
Manchuria w r hich, in contrast to the warlords, had held to the 
principle of absolute hokyo anmin (secure boundary and peace¬ 
ful life). According to him, the protection and prosperity of the 
Northeastern Provinces assumed priority over all, including the 
relationship with China proper. Through tax reform, improve¬ 
ment of the wage system of government officials, and abolition of 
a costly army, the people in Manchuria were to enjoy the benefits 
of peaceful labor, while defense was to be entrusted to their most 
powerful neighbor, Japan. [Pp. 118-19] 

In general, the Kwantung Army regarded the thirty million 
people of Manchuria—half of whom had immigrated since the 
initiation of Japanese development efforts a quarter of a cen¬ 
tury earlier—as “suffering masses who had been sacrificed to 
the misrule of warlords and the avarice of wicked officials, 
masses deriving no benefits of civilization despite the natural 
abundance of the region .” 34 Furthermore, the Army regarded 
Manchuria as “the fortress against Russian southern advance¬ 
ment, which became increasingly threatening as Soviet influ¬ 
ence over the Chinese revolution became more and more ap- 


181 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


