

342 


The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


well-guarded secret. In the case of Vietnam, if those who feel 
themselves to be experts have access to principles or informa¬ 
tion that would justify what the American government is doing 
in that unfortunate country, they have been singularly ineffec¬ 
tive in making this fact known. To anyone who has any famil¬ 
iarity with the social and behavioral sciences (or the “policy 
sciences”), the claim that there are certain considerations and 
principles too deep for the outsider to comprehend is simply an 
absurdity, unworthy of comment. 

When we consider the responsibility of intellectuals, our 
basic concern must be their role in the creation and analysis of 
ideology. And in fact, Kristol’s contrast between the unreason¬ 
able ideological types and the responsible experts is formulated 
in terms that immediately bring to mind Daniel Bell’s interest¬ 
ing and influential essay on the “end of ideology,” 26 an essay 
which is as important for what it leaves unsaid as for its actual 
content. Bell presents and discusses the Marxist analysis of 
ideology as a mask for class interest, in particular quoting 
Marx’s well-known description of the belief of the bourgeoisie 
“that the special conditions of its emancipation are the general 
conditions through which alone modern society can be saved 
and the class struggle avoided.” He then argues that the age of 
ideology is ended, supplanted, at least in the West, by a general 
agreement that each issue must be settled on its own individual 
terms, within the framework of a welfare state in which, pre¬ 
sumably, experts in the conduct of public affairs will have a 
prominent role. Bell is quite careful, however, to characterize 
the precise sense of “ideology” in which “ideologies are ex¬ 
hausted.” He is referring only to ideology as “the conversion of 
ideas into social levers,” to ideology as “a set of beliefs, infused 
with passion, . . . [which] . . . seeks to transform the whole of a 
way of life.” The crucial words are “transform” and “convert 


343 


*= AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

into social levers.” Intellectuals in the West, he argues, have lost 
interest in converting ideas into social levers for the radical 
transformation of society. Now that we have achieved the plu¬ 
ralistic society of the welfare state, they see no further need for 
a radical transformation of society; we may tinker with our way 
of life here and there, but it would be wrong to try to modify it 
in any significant way. With this consensus of intellectuals, 
ideology is dead. 

There are several striking facts about Bell’s essay. First, he 
does not point out the extent to which this consensus of the 
intellectuals is self-serving. He does not relate his observation 
that, by and large, intellectuals have lost interest in “transform¬ 
ing the whole way of life” to the fact that they play an increas¬ 
ingly prominent role in running the welfare state; he does not 
relate their general satisfaction with the welfare state to the fact 
that, as he observes elsewhere, “America has become an affluent 
society, offering place . . . and prestige ... to the onetime 
radicals.” Secondly, he offers no serious argument to show that 
intellectuals are somehow “right” or “objectively justified” in 
reaching the consensus to which he alludes, with its rejection of 
the notion that society should be transformed. Indeed, although 
Bell is fairly sharp about the empty rhetoric of the “New Left,” 
he seems to have a quite utopian faith that technical experts 
will be able to come to grips with the few problems that still 
remain; for example, the fact that labor is treated as a commod¬ 
ity, and the problems of “alienation.” 

It seems fairly obvious that the classical problems are very 
much with us; one might plausibly argue that they have even 
been enhanced in severity and scale. For example, the classical 
paradox of poverty in the midst of plenty is now an ever in¬ 
creasing problem on an international scale. Whereas one might 


344 


The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


conceive, at least in principle, of a solution within national 
boundaries, a sensible idea as to how to transform international 
society in such a way as to cope with the vast and perhaps 
increasing human misery is hardly likely to develop within the 
framework of the intellectual consensus that Bell describes. 

Thus it would seem natural to describe the consensus of Bell’s 
intellectuals in somewhat different terms than his. Using the 
terminology of the first part of his essay, we might say that the 
welfare state technician finds justification for his special and 
prominent social status in his “science,” specifically, in the claim 
