from anarchist sources: in Aragon, 450 collectives with half a 
million members; in the Levant, 900 collectives accounting for 
about half the agricultural production and 70 percent of mar¬ 
keting in this, the richest agricultural region of Spain; in Castile, 
300 collectives with about 100,000 members. 62 In Catalonia, 
the bourgeois government headed by Companys retained 
nominal authority, but real power was in the hands of the 
anarchist-dominated committees. 

The period of July through September may be characterized 


78 



Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


as one of spontaneous, widespread, but unconsummated social 
revolution. 63 A number of anarchist leaders joined the govern¬ 
ment ; the reason, as stated by Federica Montseny on January 3, 
1937, was this: . . the anarchists have entered the government 
to prevent the Revolution from deviating and in order to carry 
it further beyond the war, and also to oppose any dictatorial 
tendency, from wherever it might come.’ 764 The central gov¬ 
ernment fell increasingly under Communist control—in Cata¬ 
lonia, under the control of the Communist-dominated PSUC— 
largely as a result of the valuable Russian military assistance. 
Communist success was greatest in the rich farming areas of the 
Levant (the government moved to Valencia, capital of one of 
the provinces), where prosperous farm owners flocked to the 
Peasant Federation that the party had organized to protect the 
wealthy farmers; this federation “served as a powerful instru¬ 
ment in checking the rural collectivization promoted by the 
agricultural workers of the province.” 65 Elsewhere as well, 
counterrevolutionary successes reflected increasing Communist 
dominance of the Republic. 

The first phase of the counterrevolution was the legalization 
and regulation of those accomplishments of the revolution that 
appeared irreversible. A decree of October 7 by the Commu¬ 
nist Minister of Agriculture, Vicente Uribe, legalized certain 
expropriations—namely, of lands belonging to participants in 
the Franco revolt. Of course, these expropriations had already 
taken place, a fact that did not prevent the Communist press 
from describing the decree as “the most profoundly revolution¬ 
ary measure that has been taken since the military uprising.” 66 
In fact, by exempting the estates of landowners who had not 
directly participated in the Franco rebellion, the decree repre¬ 
sented a step backward, from the standpoint of the revolu¬ 
tionaries, and it was criticized not only by the CNT but also by 


79 


* = AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

the Socialist Federation of Land Workers, affiliated with the 
UGT. The demand for a much broader decree was unaccepta¬ 
ble to the Communist-led ministry, since the Communist party 
was “seeking support among the propertied classes in the anti- 
Franco coup” and hence “could not afford to repel the small 
and medium proprietors who had been hostile to the working 
class movement before the civil war.” 67 These “small proprie¬ 
tors,” in fact, seem to have included owners of substantial 
estates. The decree compelled tenants to continue paying rent 
unless the landowners had supported Franco, and by guaran¬ 
teeing former landholdings, it prevented distribution of land to 
the village poor. Ricardo Zabalza, general secretary of the Fed¬ 
eration of Land Workers, described the resulting situation as 
one of “galling injustice”; “the sycophants of the former political 
bosses still enjoy a privileged position at the expense of those 
persons who were unable to rent even the smallest parcel of 
land, because they were revolutionaries.” 63 

To complete the stage of legalization and restriction of what 
had already been achieved, a decree of October 24, 1936, 
promulgated by a CNT member who had become Councilor for 
Economy in the Catalonian Generalitat, gave legal sanction to 
the collectivization of industry in Catalonia. In this case too, the 
step was regressive, from the revolutionary point of view. Col¬ 
lectivization was limited to enterprises employing more than a 
hundred workers, and a variety of conditions were established 
that removed control from the workers’ committees to the state 
bureaucracy. 69 

The second stage of the counterrevolution, from October 
1936 through May 1937, involved the destruction of the local 
committees, the replacement of the militia by a conventional 
army, and the re-establishment of the prerevolutionary social 
and economic system, wherever this was possible. Finally, in 


80 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 

