candidates won, and Souphanouvong, the leading Pathet Lao figure, 
received more votes than any other candidate in the country. It was 
this election victory that set off the American attempts at subversion. 
As Dommen says, “once again the United States threw its support to 
the most feudal elements of the society.” 

To Charles Wolf, all of this demonstrates that counterinsurgency, 
like insurgency, can succeed without concern for popular loyalty and 
participation. 

37. Cited in Clairmonte, op. cit ., p. 92. The ancestors of whom 
Merivale speaks are those who crushed the Indian textile industry by 
embargoes and import duties, as was quite necessary. “Had this not 
been the case, the mills of Paisley and Manchester would have been 
stopped in their outset, and could scarcely have been again set in 
motion, even by the power of steam. They were created by the sacri- 

13 a 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


fice of Indian manufacturers” (Horace Wilson, 1826, cited by Clair- 
monte, p. 87). 

This is the classic example of the creation of underdevelopment 
through imperialism. For a detailed study of this process see Andre 
Gunder Frank, Capitalism and Underdevelopment in Latin America, 
(New York, Monthly Review Press, 1967). 

38. See Robert E. Osgood, Ideals and Self-Interest in America’s For¬ 
eign Relations (Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1953), pp. 72-73. 

39. “Some Reflections on U.S. Policy in Southeast Asia,” in William 
Henderson, ed., Southeast Asia: Problems of United States Policy 
(Cambridge, Mass., The M.I.T. Press, 1963), pp. 249-63. This collec¬ 
tion of papers was published with the encouragement of the Asia 
Society because of “the scholarly quality of the papers and their en¬ 
lightening contribution to the formation of United States policy in the 
area.” 

40. Thailand and the United States (Washington, Public Affairs Press, 
1965). 

41. The Bank of America placed a full-page ad in the Fourth of July 
edition, 1951, of the Bangkok Post saluting the kingdom of Thailand 
with these words: “In both Thailand and America democracy has 
gone hand in hand with national sovereignty. Today both nations 
stand in the forefront of world efforts to promote and defend the 
democratic way of life.” 

42. In an article on “U.S.-Thai links” in the Christian Science Moni¬ 
tor, October 14, 1967. 

43. Just a few paragraphs earlier we read that in the postwar period 
“the Americans rapidly expanded the Thai armed forces from 50,000 
to 100,000 men . . . the United States quickly increased the police 
forces, and this helped suppress opponents of the government. The 
technical assistance program was largely converted to military objec¬ 
tives. The internal impact of this policy further strengthened the power 
and prestige of the Thai military leaders who had seized the govern¬ 
ment in 1947. The effort to move toward some form of constitutional 
rule was halted, and the democratic institutions inaugurated by civil¬ 
ian leaders just after the war were abolished. Political parties were 
suppressed. The press was censored. Power became increasingly cen¬ 
tralized in the hands of a few military leaders.” All of this, however, 
did not constitute “interference in the domestic affairs of other na¬ 
tions,” and is not “contrary to American traditions.” 


134 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


44. Western Interests in the Pacific Realm (New York, Random 
House, 1967). 

45. Of what importance, then, is the fact that the overwhelming major¬ 
ity of Okinawans, including 80% of those whose businesses would be 
impaired or destroyed by this move, want the island returned to Japan, 
according to the Asahi polls (see Japan Quarterly, Vol. 15 [January- 
March 1968], pp. 42-52)? As to the “strategic trust territories,” 
Adam says, we must also not become overly sentimental: “A strategic 
trust is based on the assumption of the overriding importance of 
national defense and the preservation of world order as against the 
cultural and political freedom of the indigenous inhabitants.” 

46. H. D. Malaviya, quoted in Clairmonte {op. cit., p. 114), who 
cites substantial evidence in support of the following evaluation of the 
consequences of Western dominance: “The systematic destruction of 
Indian manufacturers; the creation of the Zemindari [landed aristoc¬ 
racy] and its parasitical outgrowths; the changes in agrarian structure; 
the financial losses incurred by tribute; the sharp transition from a pre¬ 
monetised economy to one governed by the international price mecha¬ 
nism—these were some of the social and institutional forces that were 
