solutions that are put under the label of neutralization,” this 
would amount to capitulation to the Communists . 37 According 
to this reasoning, then, South Vietnam must remain, perma¬ 
nently, an American military base. 

All of this is of course reasonable, so long as we accept the 
fundamental political axiom that the United States, with its 
traditional concern for the rights of the weak and downtrodden, 
and with its unique insight into the proper mode of develop¬ 
ment for backward countries, must have the courage and the 
persistence to impose its will by force until such time as other 
nations are prepared to accept these truths—or simply to aban¬ 
don hope. 

If it in th<* responsibility of the intellectual to insist upon the 


35 ? 


The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


truth, it is also his duty to see events in their historical perspec¬ 
tive. Thus one must applaud the insistence of the Secretary of 
State on the importance of historical analogies, the Munich 
analogy, for example. As Munich showed, a powerful and ag¬ 
gressive nation with a fanatic belief in its manifest destiny will 
regard each victory, each extension of its power and authority, 
as a prelude to the next step. The matter was very well put by 
Adlai Stevenson, when he spoke of “the old, old route whereby 
expansive powers push at more and more doors, believing they 
will open, until, at the ultimate door, resistance is unavoidable 
and major war breaks out.” Herein lies the danger of appease¬ 
ment, as the Chinese tirelessly point out to the Soviet Union, 
which they claim is playing Chamberlain to our Hitler in Viet¬ 
nam. Of course, the aggressiveness of liberal imperialism is not 
that of Nazi Germany, though the distinction may seem rather 
academic to a Vietnamese peasant who is being gassed or in¬ 
cinerated. We do not want to occupy Asia; we merely wish, to 
return to Mr. Wolf, “to help the Asian countries progress 
toward economic modernization, as relatively ‘open’ and stable 
societies, to which our access, as a country and as individual 
citizens, is free and comfortable .” 38 The formulation is appro¬ 
priate. Recent history shows that it makes little difference to us 
what form of government a country has as long as it remains an 
“open society,” in our peculiar sense of this term—a society, 
that is, which remains open to American economic penetration 
or political control. If it is necessary to approach genocide in 
Vietnam to achieve this objective, then this is the price we must 
pay in defense of freedom and the rights of man. 

It is, no doubt, superfluous to discuss at length the ways in 
which we assist other countries to progress towards open socie¬ 
ties “to which our access is free and comfortable.” One enlight¬ 
ening example is discussed in the recent congressional hearings 

353 


*= AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

from which I have now quoted several times, in the testimony 
of Willem Holst and Robert Meagher, representing the Stand¬ 
ing Committee on India of the Business Council for Interna¬ 
tional Understanding. 39 As Mr. Meagher points out: “If it was 
possible, India would probably prefer to import technicians and 
know-how rather than foreign corporations. Such is not possi¬ 
ble; therefore India accepts foreign capital as a necessary evil.” 
Of course, “the question of private capital investment in India 
. . . would be no more than a theoretical exercise” had the 
groundwork for such investment not been laid by foreign aid, 
and were it not that “necessity has forced a modification in 
India’s approach to private foreign capital.” But now, “India’s 
attitude toward private foreign investment is undergoing a sub¬ 
stantial change. From a position of resentment and ambiva¬ 
lence, it is evolving toward an acceptance of its necessity. As 
the necessity becomes more and more evident, the ambivalence 
will probably be replaced by a more accommodating attitude.” 
Mr. Holst contributes what is “perhaps a typical case history,” 
namely, “the plan under which it was proposed that the Indian 
Government in partnership with a United States private con¬ 
sortium was to have increased fertilizer production by a million 
tons per year, which is just double presently installed capacity 
in all of India. The unfortunate demise of this ambitious plan 
may be attributed in large part to the failure of both Govern¬ 
ment and business to find a workable and mutually acceptable 
solution within the framework of the well-publicized 10 busi¬ 
ness incentives.” The difficulty here was in connection with the 
percentage of equity ownership. Obviously, “fertilizers are des¬ 
perately needed in India.” Equally obviously, the consortium 
“insisted that to get the proper kind of control majority owner¬ 
ship was in fact needed.” But “the Indian Government officially 
insisted that they shall have majority ownership,” and “in some- 


354 



