17, 1968, pp. 127-34. He observes that “the most profound objection 
to this kind of strategic theory is not its limited usefulness but its 
danger, for it can lead us to believe we have an understanding of 
events and a control over their flow which we do not have.” A still 
more profound objection, I think, is that the pretended objectivity of 
“strategic theory” can be used to justify the attempt to control the flow 
of events. 

9. Seymour M. Lipset, Political Man (Garden City, N.Y., Doubleday 
& Company, Inc., 1960), p. 406. 

10. “Status Politics and New Anxieties,” in The End of Ideology 
(New York, The Free Press, 1960), p. 119. 


127 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


11. “The Necessity and Difficulty of Planning the Future Society,” 
address given at the American Institute of Planners Conference, Wash¬ 
ington, D.C., October 3, 1967. Citing this, Senator Fulbright {op. cit .) 
comments aptly that “poverty, which is a tragedy in a poor country, 
blights our affluent society with something more than tragedy; being 
unnecessary, it is deeply immoral as well.” He also compares “the 
$904 billion we have spent on military power since World War II” 
with “the $96 billion we have spent, out of our regular national 
budget, on education, health, welfare housing, and community devel¬ 
opment.” In his Challenge to Affluence (New York, Pantheon Books, 
1963), Myrdal concludes that “In society at large there is more equal¬ 
ity of opportunity today than there ever was. But for the bottom layer 
there is less or none” (p. 38). He questions the assumption that 
“America is still the free and open society of its cherished image and 
well-established ideals” and remarks that “as less and less work is 
required of the type that people in the urban and rural slums can offer, 
they will be increasingly isolated and exposed to unemployment and 
plain exploitation. There is an ugly smell rising from the basement of 
the stately American mansion” (p. 49). 

12. Adam Ulam, The Unfinished Revolution (New York, Vintage 
Books, 1964), p. 97. 

13. In 1965, 20 companies out of 420,000 made 38% of profits after 
taxes, and earnings on foreign investments were well over three times 
what they were 15 years earlier. The sales of GM exceeded the GNP 
of all but nine foreign countries. The 10 largest companies reported 
profits equal to the next 490. One thousand companies disappeared 
through merger. 

14. “America in the Technetronic Age,” Encounter , Vol. 30 (January 
1968), pp. 16-26. 

15. “Marxian Socialism in the United States,” in Donald D. Egbert 
and S. Persons, eds., Socialism and American Life (Princeton, N.J., 
Princeton University Press, 1952), Vol. 1, p. 329. 

16. Op. cit., p. 5. Less typical, and more realistic, is his belief that 
these problems also “seem to defy the social scientist’s expertise.” For 
some general discussions of this “generosity,” see, for example, David 
Horowitz, Hemispheres North and South (Baltimore, The Johns Hop¬ 
kins Press, 1966), and many special studies. American public officials 
do not share this faith in our generosity, by and large. For example, 
the Assistant Secretary of State for Latin American affairs observed 
128 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


bluntly that “the State Department is not disposed to favor large loans 
of public funds to countries not welcoming our private capital” ( State 
Department Bulletin No. 22, 1950, cited in Frederick Clairmonte, 
Economic Liberalism and Underdevelopment [Bombay and London, 
Asia Publishing House, 1960], p. 248). Eugene Black, testifying be¬ 
fore Congress on the Asian Development Bank, pointed out that 
“when the Bank makes loans you have international bids, and I am 
sure that with our ability and ingenuity in this country, we will get our 
share of the business. We certainly ought to get more than the small 
amount we contribute.” David Bell testified that “the Bank will play a 
major role in carrying forward another policy of our own assistance 
program—strengthening the role of the private sector ... by identify¬ 
ing particular projects which can attract private capital, by helping to 
draw up development plans and stimulate policies which will en¬ 
courage private initiative, and by drawing private capital to the re¬ 
gion.” Nothing here about “the generosity that characterizes our pol¬ 
icy.” 

Equally revealing is the history of programs such as the Alliance for 
Progress. As Senator Gore commented, this program “has in large 
measure come to be a subsidy for American business and American 
exporters” ( Congressional Record, July 22, 1966)—a fairly accurate 
judgment, so it appears. For example, the AID lending program in 
Latin America, according to former Alliance for Progress official Wil¬ 
liam Rogers ( The Twilight Struggle [New York, Random House, 
1967], p. 205), is based on two elements: “a demonstrated balance of 
payments needed to increase the nation’s ability to import U.S. goods 
and services, and the adoption of public policies and programs which 
would insure against capital flight on the international account side or 
