that “territorial propinquity creates special relations between 
countries, and consequently, the Government of the United 
States recognizes that Japan has special interests in China, par¬ 
ticularly in the part to which her possessions are contiguous.” 46 
In fact, the United States for several years regarded the 
Kuomintang as in revolt against the legitimate government of 
China, and even after Chiang’s massacre of Communists in 
1927, showed little pro-Nationalist sympathy. As late as 1930, 
the American minister to China saw no difference between the 
Kuomintang and the warlord rebels in Peking, and wrote that 


186 



The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


he could not “see any hope in any of the self-appointed leaders 
that are drifting over the land at the head of odd bands of 
troops.” 46 

At the same time, the United States insisted on preserving its 
special rights, including the right of extraterritoriality, which 
exempted American citizens from Chinese law. In 1928, there 
were more than 5,200 American marines in China protecting 
these rights (the Japanese army in Manchuria at the time was 
about 10,000 troops). 47 The other imperialist powers were even 
more insistent on protecting their rights, and persisted in their 
anti-Nationalist attitudes right through the Manchurian inci¬ 
dent. 

In later years, when the Japanese had begun to use force to 
guarantee their position in China, they still retained the support 
of the American business community (as long as it did not itself 
feel threatened by these actions). In 1928, American consuls 
supported the dispatch of Japanese troops; one reported that 
their arrival “has brought a feeling of relief . . . even among 
Chinese, especially those of the substantial class.” 48 The busi¬ 
ness community remained relatively pro-Japanese even after 
Japanese actions in Manchuria and Shanghai in 1931-1932; “in 
general, it was felt that the Japanese were fighting the battle of 
all foreigners against the Chinese who wished to destroy foreign 
rights and privileges . . . that if the organizing abilities of the 
Japanese were turned loose in China, it might be a good thing 
for everybody.” 49 Ambassador Grew, on November 20, 1937, 
entered in his diary a note that the MacMurray Memorandum,, 
just circulated by one of the main American spokesmen on Far 
Eastern affairs, “would serve to relieve many of our fellow 
countrymen of the generally accepted theory that Japan has 
been a big bully and China the downtrodden victim.” 50 Com¬ 
monly the American attitude remained that expressed by Am- 


187 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


★= 

bassador Nelson Johnson, who argued that the American inter¬ 
est dictated that we be neither pro-Chinese nor pro-Japanese 
but rather “must have a single eye to the . . . effect of devel¬ 
opments in the East . . . upon the future interests of America/’ 
namely, “the fact that the great population of Asia offers a 
valuable outlet for the products of our industries and that as 
our industries develop we will be more and more interested in 
cultivating an outlet for them”. 51 Also typical is his explanation 
of the attitude we should adopt “toward these oriental peoples 
for whose future we became responsible.” What we make of 
them will be “peculiarly the product of American idealism”; in 
their future “we shall continue to be interested as a father must 
be interested in the career of his son long after the son has left 
the family nest.” 52 He was concerned, in fact, that native Amer¬ 
ican altruism would be too predominant in our treatment of our 
Asian wards, and hoped rather that the “new period of Ameri¬ 
can international relations” would be “characterized by the 
acquisitive, practical side of American life rather than its ideal¬ 
istic and altruistic side.” 

As late as 1939 Ambassador Grew, speaking in Tokyo, de¬ 
scribed the American objection to the New Order as based on 
the fact that it included “depriving Americans of their long- 
established rights in China” and imposing “a system of closed 
economy.” Critics noted that nothing was said about the inde¬ 
pendence of China, and that it might w r ell appear, from his 
remarks, that “if the Japanese stopped taking actions that in¬ 
fringed on American rights the United States would not object 
to their continued occupation of China.” 53 In the fall of 1939, 
Secretary of State Hull refused to negotiate a new commercial 
treaty with Japan or arrive at a modus vivendi “unless Japan 
completely changed her attitude and practice towards our 
rights and interests in China.” 54 Had this condition been met, 


188 

