such behavior wdth silence, if not approval. 5 

To turn to someone closer to the actual formation and im¬ 
plementation of policy, consider some of the reflections of Walt 
Rostow, a man who, according to Schlesinger, brought a “spa¬ 
cious historical view 55 to the conduct of foreign affairs in the 
Kennedy administration. 6 According to his analysis, the guer¬ 
rilla warfare in Indochina in 1946 was launched by Stalin, 7 and 
Hanoi initiated the guerrilla war against South Vietnam in 
1958 (The View jrom the Seventh Floor, pp. 39 and 152). 
Similarly, the Communist planners probed the “free world spec¬ 
trum of defense 55 in Northern Azerbaijan and Greece (where 
Stalin “supported substantial guerrilla warfare 55 — ibid., pp. 
36 and 148), operating from plans carefully laid in 1945. And 
in Central Europe, the Soviet Union was not “prepared to 
accept a solution which would remove the dangerous tensions 
from Central Europe at the risk of even slowly staged corro¬ 
sion of communism in East Germany 55 {ibid., p. 156). 

It is interesting to compare these observations with studies by 
scholars actually concerned with historical events. The remark 
about Stalin's initiating the first Vietnamese war in 1946 does 
not even merit refutation. As to Hanoi's purported initiative of 
1958, the situation is more clouded. But even government 
sources 8 concede that in 1959 Hanoi received the first direct 
reports of what Diem referred to 9 as his own Algerian war, and 


327 


* - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

that only after this did they lay their plans to involve them¬ 
selves in this struggle. In fact, in December 1958 Hanoi made 
another of its many attempts—rebuffed once again by Saigon 
and the United States—to establish diplomatic and commercial 
relations with the Saigon government on the basis of the status 
quo. 10 Rostow offers no evidence of Stalin’s support for the 
Greek guerrillas: in fact, though the historical record is far from 
clear, it seems that Stalin was by no means pleased with the 
adventurism of the Greek guerrillas, who, from his point of 
view, were upsetting the satisfactory postwar imperialist settle¬ 
ment. 11 

Rostow’s remarks about Germany are more interesting still. 
He does not see fit to mention, for example, the Russian notes 
of March-April 1952, which proposed unification of Germany 
under internationally supervised elections, with withdrawal of 
all troops within a year, if there was a guarantee that a reuni¬ 
