careful not to reward, is completed with these instances: (1) 
the cancellation of trade contacts with Japan when the Kishi 
government would not allow the Chinese flag to be flown over 
its mission in Tokyo; (2) various unrealized threats to Hong 
Kong, including an appeal “to Nationalist leaders to make a 
deal”; (3) the suppression of the Tibetan revolt; (4) the Sino- 
Indian border crisis; (5) “encouraging the local communists in 
a direct use of military force, first in Laos and then in South 
Vietnam” (pp. 288 f.). 

It is not easy to decide which of these is the most telling 
example of Chinese aggression; perhaps Burma, in which, ac¬ 
cording to U Thant in 1965, “there has not been a single in¬ 
stance of outside help to the Burmese Communists,” during a 
period when Chinese Nationalist forces roamed northern Burma 
at great cost to the Burmese. It would also be interesting to 
discover what evidence was available to the director of intelli¬ 
gence for the State Department regarding Chinese control, or 
even material assistance, in the cases of Thailand, Malaya, and 
the Philippines—and also to discover why this evidence has 
never been made public. “Chinese aggression” in Indochina, in 
contrast to the responsible and purely defensive posture of the 
Western powers, is of course well documented. As to Laos, 
Hilsman himself repeats much of the well-known story of the 
American attempt to subvert the legitimate government, replac¬ 
ing it by “pro-Western neutralists” and then a right-wing mili¬ 
tary dictatorship—an attempt which continued until 1962 when 
Kennedy, in a dramatic and sensible reversal of policy, agreed 
finally to support the neutralist elements that had previously 
been backed only by the Communist powers. Quite revealing in 
this connection is Hilsman’s judgment that the real Communist 


263 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


“threat” in Laos “seems more likely to have been an expansion 
of political control based on winning peasant support in the 
villages” (p. 112)—a threat rather like that posed by the 1954 
Geneva agreements, which, the Vietminh thought, “would give 
them half of Vietnam for sure and an excellent opportunity to 
win the other half through political subversion,” i.e., an elec¬ 
toral victory (p. 103). 

Hilsman also has relevant comments on the Sino-Indian 
border dispute. He observes (p. 322) that “the Indians un¬ 
wisely provided the Chinese ample provocation by adopting a 
forward strategy—establishing isolated outposts behind the 
Chinese outposts that India felt had encroached on what they 
considered their rightful territory—and Prime Minister Nehru, 
in the early fall of 1962, announced publicly that the Indian 
Army had been ordered to clear India’s territory of the Chi¬ 
nese aggressors.” He points out that the unilateral Chinese pull¬ 
back of their victorious armies showed that we face “not only a 
powerful enemy but a politically skillful one” (p. 338). He does 
not, unfortunately, go into the background of the conflict, but 
excellent Western sources exist that thoroughly refute the sim¬ 
plistic view r —advanced, to my knowledge, by not a single 
Western scholar—that the border dispute was merely, or even 
primarily, a matter of “Chinese aggression.” The issue of Tibet 
we need not discuss, since whatever the facts may be—and if 
Western scholarship is to be trusted, they are not simply what is 
claimed by American propaganda—Tibet is internationally 
recognized as a region of China; one might with equal logic 
accuse the United States of aggression in Watts, or in the Mis¬ 
sissippi Delta, where, reports indicate, thousands are starving 
while Washington plays politics. 

Elsewhere, Hilsman demonstrates Chinese aggressiveness on 
the basis of the principle of post hoc ergo propter hoc: 


264 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


It was in November 1957, following the Soviet Sputnik success, 
that Mao proclaimed that the “East Wind prevails over the West 
Wind” and so heralded the shift from the “Bandung” policy of 
peaceful coexistence back to a hard line. In South Vietnam inci¬ 
dents of guerrilla terrorism and assassination began to mount. [Pp. 
418-19] 

The same claim is made in connection with his discussion of the 
difficulties faced by the “pro-Western neutralist” Phoui Sanani- 
kone, who came to power through American intrigue in 
Laos: 

Phoui and his policy also had the misfortune to come to the 
test just when Communist policy was changing away from the 
“peaceful coexistence” of the Bandung spirit to the hard line 
enunciated by Mao Tse-tung in his “East Wind Over West Wind” 
speech in Moscow in November 1957. It was during the next year 
that Hanoi, following this new hard line, reached the decision to 
begin the guerrilla war against the South. [P. 119] 
