merely a kind of irrelevant nuisance, a minor irritant diverting 
energy from the struggle to save the bourgeois government. 


100 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


The decision to crush the revolution by force is described as 
follows: 

On May 5, Companys obtained a fragile truce, on the basis of 
which the PSUC councilors were to retire from the regional 
government, and the question of the Telephone Company was left 
to future negotiation. That very night, however, Antonio Sese, a 
UGT official who was about to enter the reorganized cabinet, was 
murdered. In any event, the Valencia authorities were in no 
mood to temporize further with the Catalan Left. On May 6 
several thousand asaltos arrived in the city, and the Republican 
Navy demonstrated in the port. 95 

What is interesting about this description is what is left un¬ 
said. For example, there is no comment on the fact that the 
dispatch of the asaltos violated the “fragile truce” that had been 
accepted by the Barcelona workers and the anarchist and the 
POUM troops nearby, and barely a mention of the bloody con¬ 
sequences or the political meaning of this unwillingness “to 
temporize further with the Catalan Left.” There is no mention 
of the fact that along with Sese, Berneri and other anarchist 
leaders were murdered, not only during the May Days but in 
the weeks preceding . 90 Jackson does not refer to the fact that 
along with the Republican navy, British ships also “demon¬ 
strated” in the port . 97 Nor does he refer to Orwell’s telling 
observations about the Assault Guards, as compared to the 
troops at the front, where he had spent the preceding months. 
The Assault Guards “were splendid troops, much the best I had 
seen in Spain. ... I was used to the ragged, scarcely-armed 
militia on the Aragon front, and I had not known that the 
Republic possessed troops like these. . . . The Civil Guards and 
Carabineros, who were not intended for the front at all, were 
better armed and far better clad than ourselves. I suspect it is 
the same in all wars—always the same contrast between the 


101 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 
