meaning, is now merely a national war of independence that must 
be carried on to avoid the extermination that the international 
plutocracy demands. There remains a terrible question of life or 
death, but no longer a war to build a new society and a new 
humanity. 

In such a war, the human element that might bring victory over 
fascism is lost. 

In retrospect, Berneri’s ideas seem quite reasonable. Delega¬ 
tions of Moroccan nationalists did in fact approach the Va¬ 
lencia government asking for arms and materiel, but were 
refused by Caballero, who actually proposed territorial conces¬ 
sions in North Africa to France and England to try to win their 
support. Commenting on these facts, Broue and Temime ob¬ 
serve that these policies deprived the Republic of “the instru¬ 
ment of revolutionary defeatism in the enemy army,” and even 
of a possible weapon against Italian intervention. Jackson, on 
the other hand, dismisses Berneri’s suggestion with the remark 
that independence for Morocco (as for that matter, even aid to 
the Moroccan nationalists) was “a gesture that would have 
been highly appreciated in Paris and London.” Of course it is 
correct that France and Britain would hardly have appreciated 
this development. As Berneri points out, “it goes without saying 
that one cannot simultaneously guarantee French and British 
interests in Morocco and carry out an insurrection.” But Jack- 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


son’s comment does not touch on the central issue, namely, 
whether the Spanish revolution could have been preserved, 
both from the fascists at the front and from the bourgeois- 
Communist coalition within the Republic, by a revolutionary 
war of the sort that the left proposed—or, for that matter, 
whether the Republic might not have been saved by a political 
struggle that involved Franco’s invading Moorish troops, or at 
least eroded their morale. It is easy to see why Caballero was 
not attracted by this bold scheme, given his reliance on the 
eventual backing of the Western democracies. On the basis of 
what we know today, however, Jackson’s summary dismissal of 
revolutionary war is much too abrupt. 

Furthermore, Bertoni’s observations from the Huesca front 
are borne out by much other evidence, some of it cited earlier. 
Even those who accepted the Communist strategy of discipline 
and central control as necessary concede that the repressions 
that formed an ineliminable part of this strategy “tended to 
break the fighting spirit of the people .” 110 One can only specu¬ 
