icate the menace of Communism, to correct the aggressive poli¬ 
cies of the great powers, and to secure her position as the 
stabilizing power in East Asia. Even in 1937, the Japanese gov¬ 
ernment had “no territorial designs upon China.” In short, we 
follow a well-trodden path. 

It is useful to remember, incidentally, that the United States 
was apparently quite willing, as late as 1939, to negotiate a 
commercial treaty with Japan and arrive at a modus vivendi if 
Japan would “change her attitude and practice towards our 
rights and interests in China,” as Secretary Hull put it. The 
bombing of Chungking and the rape of Nanking were rather 
unpleasant, it is true, but what was really important was our 
rights and interests in China, as the responsible, unhysterical 
men of the day saw quite clearly. It was the closing of the Open 
Door by Japan that led inevitably to the Pacific war, just as it is 
the closing of the Open Door by “Communist” China itself that 
may very well lead to the next, and no doubt last, Pacific war. 

Quite often, the statements of sincere and devoted technical 
experts give surprising insight into the intellectual attitudes that 
lie in the background of the latest savagery. Consider, for ex¬ 
ample, the following comment by economist Richard Lindholm, 
in 1959, expressing his frustration over the failure of economic 


357 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


★= 

development in “free Vietnam”: . . the use of American aid is 
determined by how the Vietnamese use their incomes and their 
savings. The fact that a large portion of the Vietnamese imports 
financed with American aid are either consumer goods or raw 
materials used rather directly to meet consumer demands is an 
indication that the Vietnamese people desire these goods, for 
they have shown their desire by their willingness to use their 
piasters to purchase them.” 42 

In short, the Vietnamese people desire Buicks and air condi¬ 
tioners, rather than sugar-refining equipment or road-building 
machinery, as they have shown by their behavior in a free 
market. And however much we may deplore their free choice, 
we must allow the people to have their way. Of course, there 
are also those two-legged beasts of burden that one stumbles on 
in the countryside, but as any graduate student of political 
science can explain, they are not part of a responsible moderniz¬ 
ing elite, and therefore have only a superficial biological resem¬ 
blance to the human race. 

In no small measure, it is attitudes like this that lie behind the 
butchery in Vietnam, and we had better face up to them with 
candor, or we will find our government leading us towards a 
“final solution” in Vietnam, and in the many Vietnams that 
inevitably lie ahead. 

Let me finally return to Macdonald and the responsibility of 
intellectuals. Macdonald quotes an interview with a death- 
camp paymaster who bursts into tears when told that the Rus¬ 
sians would hang him. “Why should they? What have I done?” 
he asked. Macdonald concludes: “Only those who are willing to 
resist authority themselves when it conflicts too intolerably with 
their personal moral code, only they have the right to condemn 
the death-camp paymaster.” The question “What have I done?” 


358 



The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


is one that we may well ask ourselves, as we read, each day, of 
fresh atrocities in Vietnam—as we create, or mouth, or tolerate 
the deceptions that will be used to justify the next defense of 
freedom. 


Notes 

I. Such a research project has now been undertaken and published as 
a “Citizens’ White Paper”: F. Schurmann, P. D. Scott, and R. Zelnik, 
The Politics of Escalation in Vietnam (New York, Fawcett World 
Library, and Boston, Beacon Press, 1966). For further evidence of 
American rejection of United Nations initiatives for diplomatic set¬ 
tlement, just prior to the major escalation of February 1965, see 
Mario Rossi, “The US Rebuff to U Thant,” New York Review of 
Books , November 17, 1966. See also Theodore Draper, “How Not To 
Negotiate,” New York Review of Books , May 4, 1967. There is fur¬ 
ther documentary evidence of NLF attempts to establish a coalition 
government and to neutralize the area, all rejected by the United 
States and its Saigon ally, in Douglas Pike, Viet Cong (Cambridge, 
Mass., The M.I.T. Press, 1966). In reading material of this latter sort 
one must be especially careful to distinguish between the evidence 
presented and the “conclusions” that are asserted, for reasons noted 
