varying reactions to the society that is developing. But there is 
nothing to justify our shameful treatment of China in the post¬ 
war years. 

With all the cynicism of the mid-twentieth century, it is nev¬ 
ertheless startling to see how easily the rhetoric of imperialism 
comes to American lips, sometimes muted, sometimes entirely 
overt. Arthur Schlesinger writes that if our killing machine 
achieves a victory in Vietnam, “we may all be saluting the wis- 


267 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


dom and statesmanship of the American government.” 79 That 
an American military victory might be a tragedy—this is un¬ 
thinkable. Roger Hilsman speaks of “the Korean War, Dien- 
bienphu, the two Laos crises, and Vietnam [as] only the open¬ 
ing guns of what might well be a century-long struggle for 
Asia.” 80 What kind of struggle it will be is clear, if Laos and 
Vietnam are precedents. The foreign editor of Look magazine 
writes: 

The Far East is now our Far West. The western frontier of 
American power today stands on the far side of the Pacific 
Ocean. ... It stretches through the island chain off the Asian 
mainland with three toeholds on the continent, Korea, Vietnam 
and Thailand. . . . We are a Pacific power—the only Pacific 
power. We are there to stay. . . . This is where we have markets 
and, except for Japan, no rival producers. 81 

These sentiments are familiar. It has been a long-standing be¬ 
lief, expressed by Cordell Hull, Henry Wallace, Dean Acheson r 
and many others, that we can escape recurrent economic stag¬ 
nation or internal regimentation only with ever expanding 
markets. These words recall the characteristically direct form¬ 
ulations of Harry Truman, who proclaimed in 1947 (in James 
Warburg’s paraphrase) that “the whole world should adopt the 
American system [which] could survive in America only if it 
became a world system,” 82 noting also that unless the trend 
toward nationalization is reversed, the “American way” and the 
“way of peace” will be threatened. 

And the natural counterpart to this doctrine is neatly ex¬ 
pressed in the 1967 Prize Essay of the United States Naval 
Institute, by Professor Harold Rood of Claremont College, who 
argues as follows: 

The U.S. position in the Pacific is no longer what it was in 1941. 
The territory which came under direct Japanese attack early in 
the war, the Hawaiian islands and the Aleutians, are each sov- 


268 




The Logic of Withdrawal 


ereign states today. . . . Yet Hawaii is closer to Peking than it is to 
Washington, D.C. The Aleutian islands at their westernmost tip 
are closer to China than they are to Seattle, Washington. Where 
once the security of the United States could conveniently, it 
seemed, rest on Alaska and Hawaii in the Pacific, these two states 
now have the right to demand the same kind of security which 
each of them once helped furnish to the continental United 
States. 

Consider the implications. Our allies and our bases in Taiwan, 
Camranh Bay, Thailand, also have the right to demand 
the same kind of security which each of them now helps furnish 
to Alaska and Hawaii. And so on, indefinitely. Of course, we 
have heard all of this before. Japan once needed Manchuria for 
survival—without Manchuria, it was a “potted plant,” without 
roots. And to secure Manchuria it was obviously necessary to 
ensure that North China was “friendly,” and then all of China, 
and Southeast Asia, and on to the Pacific war. Our claim to 
special rights in Asia is, on grounds of security or economic 
interest, far weaker than that of Japan. Japan, however, was 
dwarfed in wealth and power by a colossus across the seas, and 
we are not. 

Along such lines as these, one could develop an instructive 
sequel to Howard Zinn’s discussion of “Munich, dominoes, and 
containment.” 

What would be the consequences of a withdrawal of Ameri¬ 
can forces from Vietnam? If past events are any guide, the 
cessation of aggressive military action by the United States will 
lead to a disengagement of North Vietnamese units, as hap¬ 
pened, apparently, during the bombing pause in January 1966. 
It is noteworthy that no group in South Vietnam has advocated 
North Vietnamese involvement in an immediate political solu¬ 
tion, and the same North Vietnamese leadership that was will¬ 
ing, a decade ago, to arrange a modus vivendi with Diem 
