


Introduction 


be free to develop a higher form of society in peace. Controlling 
this elementary human reaction, we enter into a technical de¬ 
bate with the Nazi intelligentsia: Is it technically feasible to 
dispose of millions of bodies? What is the evidence that the 
Slavs are inferior beings? Must they be ground under foot or 
returned to their “natural” home in the East so that this great 
culture can flourish, to the benefit of all mankind? Is it true that 
the Jews are a cancer eating away at the vitality of the German 
people? and so on. Without awareness, I found myself drawn 
into this morass of insane rationality—inventing arguments to 
counter and demolish the constructions of the Bormanns and 
the Rosenbergs. 

By entering into the arena of argument and counterargu¬ 
ment, of technical feasibility and tactics, of footnotes and cita¬ 
tions, by accepting the presumption of legitimacy of debate on 
certain issues, one has already lost one’s humanity. This is the 
feeling I find almost impossible to repress when going through 
the motions of building a case against the American war in 
Vietnam. Anyone who puts a fraction of his mind to the task 
can construct a case that is overwhelming; surely this is now 
obvious. In an important way, by doing so he degrades himself, 
and insults beyond measure the victims of our violence and our 
moral blindness. There may have been a time when American 
policy in Vietnam was a debatable matter. This time is long 
past. It is no more debatable than the Italian war in Abyssinia 
or the Russian suppression of Hungarian freedom. The war is 
simply an obscenity, a depraved act by weak and miserable 
men, including all of us, who have allowed it to go on and on 
with endless fury and destruction—all of us who would have 
remained silent had stability and order been secured. It is not 
pleasant to use such words, but candor permits no less. 


9 


* - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

The things we have seen and read during these horrible years 
surpass belief. I have in front of me now an Associated Press 
photo from the New York Times with this caption: 

homeless children: Girl holds her wounded baby sister as South 
