determine just what was taking place at the Pentagon. All we 
could see was the surging of the crowd. From secondhand re¬ 
ports, I understand that the marchers passed through and 
around the front line of troops and took up a position, which 
they maintained, on the steps of the Pentagon. It soon became 
obvious that it was wrong for the few organizers of the march 
and the mostly middle-aged group that had gathered near them 
to remain at the speakers’ platform while the demonstrators 
themselves, most of them quite young, were at the Pentagon. (I 
recall seeing near the platform Robert Lowell, Dwight Mac¬ 
donald, Monsignor Rice, Sidney Lens, Benjamin Spock and his 
wife, Dagmar Wilson, Donald Kalish.) Dave Dellinger sug¬ 
gested that we try to approach the Pentagon. We found a place 
not yet blocked by the demonstrators, and walked up to the line 
of troops standing a few feet from the building. Dellinger sug¬ 
gested that those of us who had not yet spoken at the rally talk 
directly to the soldiers through a small portable sound system. 
From this point on, my impressions are rather fragmentary. 
Monsignor Rice spoke, and I followed. As I was speaking, the 
line of soldiers advanced, moving past me—a rather odd expe- 


372 


On Resistance 


rience. I don’t recall just what I was saying. The gist was, I 
suppose, that we were there because we didn’t want the sol¬ 
diers to kill and be killed, but I do remember feeling that the 
way I was putting it seemed silly and irrelevant. 

The advancing line of soldiers had partially scattered the 
small group that had come with Dellinger. Those of us who had 
been left behind the line of soldiers regrouped, and Dr. Spock 
began to speak. Almost at once, another line of soldiers 
emerged from somewhere, this time in a tightly massed forma¬ 
tion, rifles in hand, and moved slowly forward. We sat down. 
As I mentioned earlier, I had no intention of taking part in any 
act of civil disobedience, until that moment. But when that 
grotesque organism began slowly advancing—more grotesque 
because its cells were recognizable human beings—it became 
obvious that one could not permit that thing to dictate what 
one was going to do. I was arrested at that point by a federal 
marshal, presumably for obstructing the soldiers (the technical 
term for this behavior is “disorderly conduct”) I should add 
that the soldiers, so far as I could see (which was not very far), 
seemed rather unhappy about the whole matter, and were 
being about as gentle as one can be when ordered (I presume 
this was the order) to kick and club passive, quiet people who 
refuse to move. The federal marshals, predictably, were very 
different. They reminded me of the police officers I had seen in 
a Jackson, Mississippi, jail several summers ago, who had 
laughed when an old man showed us a bloody homemade ban¬ 
dage on his leg and tried to describe to us how he had been 
beaten by the police. In Washington, the ones who got the 
worst of it at the hands of the marshals were the young boys 
and girls, particularly boys with long hair. Nothing seemed to 
bring out the marshals’ sadism more than the sight of a boy 
with long hair. Yet, although I witnessed some acts of violence 


373 


*= AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

by the marshals, their behavior largely seemed to range from 
indifference to petty nastiness. For example, we were kept in a 
police van for an hour or two with the doors closed and only a 
few air holes for ventilation—one can’t be too careful with such 
ferocious criminal types. 

In the prison dormitory and after my release I heard many 
stories, which I feel sure are authentic, of the courage of the 
young people, many of whom were quite frightened by the 
terrorism that began late at night after the TV cameramen and 
most of the press had left. They sat quietly hour after hour 
through the cold night; many were kicked and beaten and 
dragged across police lines (more “disorderly conduct”). I also 
heard stories, distressing ones, of provocation of the troops by the 
demonstrators—usually, it seems, those who were not in the front 
rows. Surely this was indefensible. Soldiers are unwitting instru¬ 
ments of terror; one does not blame or attack the club that is 
used to bludgeon someone to death. They are also human beings, 
with sensibilities to which one can perhaps appeal. There is in 
fact strong evidence that one soldier, perhaps three or four, re¬ 
fused to obey orders and was placed under arrest. The soldiers, 
after all, are in much the same position as the draft resisters. If 
they obey orders, they become brutalized by w T hat they do; if 
they do not, the personal consequences are severe. It is a situa¬ 
tion that deserves compassion, not abuse. But we should retain a 
sense of proportion in the matter. Everything that I saw or heard 
indicates that the demonstrators played only a small role in 
initiating the considerable violence that occurred. 

The argument that resistance to the war should remain 
strictly nonviolent seems to me overwhelming. As a tactic, vio¬ 
lence is absurd. No one can compete with the government in 
