significant is that it is the technical side of the war that appeals to 
them, not the interpretative or political side. The formulation of 
values and ideals, the production of articulate and suggestive 
thinking, had not, in their education, kept pace, to any extent 
whatever, with their technical aptitude. . . . [Dewey’s] disciples 
have learned all too literally the instrumental attitude toward life, 
and, being immensely intelligent and energetic, they are making 
themselves efficient instruments of the war technique, accepting 
with little question the ends as announced from above . 2 

Bourne is describing, not the “New Frontier,” the “new man¬ 
darins” of the 1960s, but the liberal and radical intellectuals of 


6 



Introduction 


1917. His essay is entitled “Twilight of Idols.” With the Vietnam 
war, twilight has turned to midnight. 

In the same essay, Bourne speaks with hope of the “thorough 
malcontents” with their 

Irritation at things as they are, disgust at the frustrations and 
aridities of American life, deep dissatisfaction with self and with 
the groups that give themselves as hopeful—out of such moods 
there might be hammered new values. The malcontents would be 
men and women who could not stomach the war, or the reac¬ 
tionary idealism that has followed in its train. They are quite 
through with the professional critics and classicists who have let 
cultural values die through their own personal ineptitude. Yet 
these malcontents have no intention of being cultural vandals, 
only to slay. They are not barbarians, but seek the vital and the 
sincere everywhere . 3 

He speaks with hope that “a more skeptical, malicious, des¬ 
perate, ironical mood may actually be the sign of more vivid 
and more stirring life fermenting in America today. . . . Malcon- 
tentedness may be the beginning of promise.” The postwar re¬ 
pression all but destroyed this promise. Today, as the Cold War 
ideology is collapsing and American power is proving incapable 
of achieving dominance over Asia, there is once again the smell 
of repression in the air. If we can learn anything from history, 
we will find a way to avoid the arrogance and divisiveness that 
has been the curse of the left and unite to resist this repression, 
to realize the promise that might grow from malcontentedness, 
