spiritual culture nor the moral fibre that would have allowed 
them to understand and carry out their task . 38 

Apart from its rhetorical flair, this might be the testimony of 
Rutherford Poats today. Mr. Poats’s testimony will come as no 
surprise to those who have been paying attention to the la¬ 
ments of senior American officials in Saigon. In 1959, one such 
official 39 commented that “in the case of Free Viet-Nam the 
lack of even a bare minimum of economic self-sufficiency makes 
enduring political independence only an illusion,” and com¬ 
plained that “the majority of the aid is used in a manner that 
maintains an extravagant standard of living.” “The Viet-Minh,” 
he said, “. . . can make a strong case that the United States is 
effectively replacing France as the new master of Free Viet- 
Nam.” Poats’s testimony simply shows how little things have 
changed. Many additional illustrations of the character of the 
collaborationist elements might be cited. 40 The whole situation 
recalls vividly other episodes in the history of colonialism, for 
example, the situation in the Philippines during the period of 


238 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


the Japanese occupation. The prospects are for deepening 
misery and still further devastation, so long as the American 
occupation continues. 

Christopher Lydon, the Boston Globe correspondent who ac¬ 
companied General Gavin on his recent trip to Vietnam, con¬ 
cluded a series of articles reporting his impressions with a quo¬ 
tation from Ton That Thien, managing editor of the Vietnam 
Guardian, which was suppressed by the Saigon regime when it 
printed a report questioning the official claim that Assembly 
member Tran Van Van was assassinated by the Vietcong. Thien 
defines what he sees as the only possible American “victory”: 

You cannot defeat the other side militarily unless you devote the 
next 30 or 40 years to it. You can win if you keep killing for a 
generation. You simply exterminate all the Vietnamese—the way 
you killed the Indians in America—and there will be no more 
war. 

Lydon comments: “This agony, if not utter desperation, among 
what seemed to me the most sensitive and patriotic Vietnamese, 
about the burden of American arms on their country is the 
overriding impression I carry back from this tortured capital.” 41 
