Nevertheless, we might as well face up to the overwhelming 
probability that the choice in November will be between barely 
distinguishable policies. Senator McCarthy’s candidacy might 
be important as an educational effort (it can hardly be re¬ 
garded as a political effort) if McCarthy were to raise serious 
issues and break free from the narrow limits of what passes for 
political discussion in this country today, but as yet he has not 
done so. It is a remarkable fact that in this democracy, not a 
single public figure, no segment of the mass media, advocates 
the position which, according to the recent international Gallup 
polls, is that of the overwhelming majority in most of the “free 
world”—that the United States should withdraw from Vietnam. 

392 


Supplement to “On Resistance” 


The basic issues are not discussed in the mass media and are 
not raised in the political arena. These are the realities that we 
must face in determining an appropriate mode of political action. 

To summarize, draft resistance can make use of the inegali¬ 
tarian nature of American society as a technique for increasing 
the cost of American aggression, and it threatens values that are 
important to those in a decision-making position. (One who 
shares these values must then ask how they benefit our victims, 
and what price our victims must pay to secure these values from 
any risk.) It is difficult to judge how heavily such costs will 
weigh in the balance, but I think that Mr. Y is not justified in 
contending that the goal of resistance can only be to safeguard 
one’s purity of conscience. 

Of course, resistance might backfire; it might lead the “prag¬ 
matic opposition” to demand a harsh and brutal victory. How¬ 
ever, the danger seems to me slight. There is no reason why a 
principled and obviously courageous and highly moral act 
should have this consequence. Rather, I think it is likely to 
cause others to consider their own complicity, in their work, in 
their payment of war taxes, in their preservation of the domestic 
peace that permits the warmakers to operate freely. Further¬ 
more, it is important to bear in mind that any political act 
carries with it a potential danger of this sort. For example, it is 
not unlikely that President Johnson would react to a threat at 
the polls with a sharp escalation, on the theory (probably cor¬ 
rect) that this would gain him at least short-term support. I see 
no reason to believe that nonviolent resistance is more likely to 
have this consequence than electoral politics. Quite the con¬ 
trary. 

Although I agree with Mr. X that resistance can be an effec¬ 
tive political act, I think his analysis errs in three respects. First, 
I think he miscalculates the effect that disruptive actions will 


393 


★== 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


have on the middle class that he wants to move to opposition. 
Second, I think he is considering the notion of “cost” in too 
narrow a sense. And third, I believe that he underestimates the 
force the government commands. As to the first matter, he fails 
to take into account the strong likelihood that disruptive acts 
will increase the urge to win the war by pure terror, with per¬ 
haps a violent repression at home as well. As far as costs are 
concerned, he considers only the matter of “effort and money.” 
But these, I suspect, are negligible costs when we consider the 
kinds of disruptive acts that might be carried out by the white 
middle class, students or adults. The million dollars spent by 
the government on October 21 is a trivial sum for the govern¬ 
ment—but the substantially greater sums expended to mount 
the demonstration are not at all trivial, for the “peace move¬ 
ment.” Hence if the criterion is cost in this sense, the demon¬ 
stration would have to be regarded as a serious setback. In 
general, I think that the important costs that can be increased 
by student and middle-class resistance are the more abstract 
ones discussed earlier. These cannot be calculated in dollars and 
cents, but they are no less real for that. 

As to the matter of government force, I think it is surely 
ample to control, with ease, any disruptive acts that can now be 
foreseen. As Hans Morgenthau observed recently, there has 
been a qualitative shift in the balance of force between a gov¬ 
ernment and a massed populace, and this disparity can only 
increase. A report last June by the Institute of Defense Analysis 
proposed a great many delightful new ideas for “crowd control” 
(itching powder, “sticky blobs to glue rioters together,” chemi¬ 
cal agents, “mechanically spread sticky strings, bands, or adhe¬ 
sives which might slow the movement of the crowd by linking 
people together or to themselves,” foam generators which lead 
to “psychological distress through loss of contact with the en- 


