complaints in any case. It can, in fact, only be agreeable to us if 
the center of gravity, which after all has thus far been in Paris 
because of the French initiative, is transferred to London.” 132 
They were not disappointed. In November, Foreign Secretary 
Anthony Eden stated in the House of Commons: “So far as 
breaches [of the nonintervention agreement] are concerned, I 
wish to state categorically that I think there are other Govern¬ 
ments more to blame than those of Germany and Italy.” 133 
There was no factual basis for this statement, but it did reflect 
British attitudes. It is interesting that according to German 
sources, England was at that time supplying Franco with 
munitions through Gibraltar and, at the same time, providing 
information to Germany about Russian arms deliveries to the 
Republic. 134 

The British left was for the most part in support of the lib- 
eral-Communist coalition, regarding Caballero as an “infantile 
leftist” and the anarchists as generally unspeakable. 

The British policy of mild support for Franco was to be suc¬ 
cessful in preserving British interests in Spain, as the Germans 
soon discovered. A German Foreign Ministry note of October 


119 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


1937 to the embassy in Nationalist Spain included the following 
observation: “That England cannot permanently be kept from 
the Spanish market as in the past is a fact w T ith which we have 
to reckon. England’s old relations with the Spanish mines and 
the Generalissimo’s desire, based on political and economic con¬ 
siderations, to come to an understanding with England place 
certain limits on our chances of reserving Spanish raw materials 
to ourselves permanently.” 135 

One can only speculate as to what might have been the 
effects of British support for the Republic. A discussion of this 
matter would take us far afield, into a consideration of British 
diplomacy during the late 1930s. It is perhaps worth mention, 
now that the “Munich analogy” is being bandied about in 
utter disregard for the historical facts by Secretary Rusk and a 
number of his academic supporters, that “containment of 
Communism” was not a policy invented by George Kennan in 
1947. Specifically, it was a dominant theme in the diplomacy of 
the 1930s. In 1934, Lloyd George stated that “in a very short 
time, perhaps in a year, perhaps in two, the conservative ele¬ 
