Moderate American scholarship does not seem capable of com¬ 
prehending these simple truths. 

It w T ould be wrong to leave the impression that the ideology 
of the liberal intelligentsia translates itself into policy as a rain 
of cluster bombs and napalm. In fact, the liberal experts have 
been dismayed by the emphasis on military means in Vietnam 
and have consistently argued that the key to our efforts should 
be social restructuring and economic assistance. Correspond¬ 
ingly, I think that we can perceive more clearly the attitudes 
that are crystallizing among the new mandarins by considering 
the technical studies of pacification, for example, the research 
monograph of William Nighswonger, cited earlier (see note 4 ). 
The author, now a professor of political science, was senior 
United States civilian representative of the Agency for Inter¬ 
national Development in Quang Nam Province from 1962 to 
1964 . As he sees the situation, “the knotty problems of pacifica¬ 
tion are intricately intertwined with the issues of political de¬ 
velopment and they necessitate—at this time in history—inti¬ 
mate American involvement.” Thus Americans must ask some 
“basic questions of value and obligation—questions that tran¬ 
scend the easy legalisms of ‘self-determination’ and ‘noninter¬ 
vention/ ” These easy legalisms have little relevance to a world 

37 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


in which the West is challenged by “the sophisticated method¬ 
ology and quasi-religious motivation of Communist insur¬ 
gency.” It is our duty, in the interest of democracy and free¬ 
dom, to apply our expertise to these twin goals: “to isolate the 
enemy and destroy his influence and control over the rural pop¬ 
ulation, and to win the peasant’s willing support through effec¬ 
tive local administration and programs of rural improvement.” 
“An underlying assumption is that insurgency ought to be de¬ 
feated—for the sake of human rights. . . .” Despite the “re¬ 
markable achievements in economic and social development” in 
Russia and China, “The South Vietnamese peasant deserves 
something better,” and we must give it to him—as we have in 
Latin America and the Philippines—even if this requires aban¬ 
doning the easy legalisms of the past and intervening with mili¬ 
tary force. 

Of course, it won’t be easy. The enemy has enormous ad¬ 
vantages. For one thing, “as in China, the insurgents in Vietnam 
have exploited the Confucian tenets of ethical rule both by their 
attacks on government corruption and by exemplary Com¬ 
