ment that “they could not survive a ‘peaceful settlement' that 
left the Vietcong political structure in place even if the Viet- 
cong guerrilla units were disbanded,” that “they are not able to 
compete politically with the Vietnamese Communists.” 35 Thus, 
Mohr continues, the Vietnamese demand a “pacification pro¬ 
gram” which will have as “its core ... the destruction of the 
clandestine Vietcong political structure and the creation of an 
iron-like system of government political control over the popu¬ 
lation.” And from Manila, the same correspondent, on October 
23, quotes a high South Vietnamese official as saying: “Frankly, 
we are not strong enough now to compete with the Communists 
on a purely political basis. They are organized and disciplined. 
The non-Communist nationalists are not—we do not have any 
large, well-organized political parties and we do not yet have 
unity. We cannot leave the Vietcong in existence.” Officials in 
Washington understand the situation very well. Thus Secretary 
Rusk has pointed out that “if the Vietcong come to the confer¬ 
ence table as full partners they will, in a sense, have been 
victorious in the very aims that South Vietnam and the United 
States are pledged to prevent” (January 28, 1966). Similarly, 
Max Frankel reported from Washington: “Compromise has had 
no appeal here because the Administration concluded long ago 


351 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


that the non-Communist forces of South Vietnam could not 
long survive in a Saigon coalition with Communists. It is for that 
reason—and not because of an excessively rigid sense of proto¬ 
col—that Washington has steadfastly refused to deal with the 
Vietcong or recognize them as an independent political force .” 36 

In short, we will—magnanimously—permit Vietcong repre¬ 
sentatives to attend negotiations, but only if they will agree to 
identify themselves as agents of a foreign power and thus forfeit 
the right to participate in a coalition government, a right which 
they have now been demanding for a half-dozen years. We know 
well that in any representative coalition, our chosen delegates 
could not last a day without the support of American arms. 
Therefore, we must increase American force and resist mean¬ 
ingful negotiations, until the day when a client government can 
exert both military and political control over its own population 
—a day which may never dawn, for as William Bundy has 
pointed out, we could never be sure of the security of a South¬ 
east Asia “from which the Western presence was effectively 
withdrawn.” Thus if we were to “negotiate in the direction of 
