far), is not only a highly principled and courageous act, but one 
that might receive broad support and become politically effec¬ 
tive. It might, furthermore, succeed in raising the issues of pas¬ 
sive complicity in the war which are now much too easily 
evaded. Those who face these issues may even go on to free 
themselves from the mind-destroying ideological pressures of 
American life, and to ask some serious questions about Amer- 
ca’s role in the world, and the sources, in American society, for 
this criminal behavior. 

Moreover, I feel that this objection to resistance is not prop¬ 
erly formulated. The “peace movement” exists only in the fanta¬ 
sies of the paranoid right. Those who find some of the means 
employed or ends pursued objectionable can oppose the war in 
other ways. They will not be read out of a movement that does 


379 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


not exist; they have only themselves to blame if they do not 
make use of the other forms of protest that are available. 

I have left to the end the most important question, the one 
about which I have least to say. This is the question of the 
forms resistance should take. We all take part in the war to a 
greater or lesser extent, if only by paying taxes and permitting 
domestic society to function smoothly. A person has to choose 
for himself the point at which he will simply refuse to take part 
any longer. Reaching that point, he will be drawn into resist¬ 
ance. I believe that the reasons for resistance I have already 
mentioned are cogent ones: they have an irreducible moral ele¬ 
ment that admits of little discussion. The issue is posed in its 
starkest form for the boy who faces induction, and in a form 
that is somewhat more complex for the boy who must decide 
whether to participate in a system of selective service that may 
pass the burden from him to others less fortunate and less privi¬ 
leged. It is difficult for me to see how anyone can refuse to 
engage himself, in some way, in the plight of these young men. 
There are many ways to do so: legal aid and financial support; 
participation in support demonstrations; draft counseling, or¬ 
ganization of draft-resistance unions or community-based re¬ 
sistance organizations; assisting those who wish to escape the 
country; the steps proposed by the clergymen who recently 
announced that they are ready to share the fate of those who 
will be sent to prison. About this aspect of the program of 
resistance I have nothing to say that will not be obvious to 
anyone who is willing to think the matter through. 

Considered as a political tactic, resistance requires careful 
thought, and I do not pretend to have very clear ideas about it. 
Much depends on how events unfold in the coming months. 
Westmoreland’s war of attrition may simply continue with no 
foreseeable end, but the domestic political situation makes this 


380 


On Resistance 


unlikely. If the Republicans do not decide to throw the election 
again, they could have a winning strategy: they can claim that 
they will end the war, and remain vague about the means. 
Under such circumstances, it is unlikely that Johnson will per¬ 
mit the present military stalemate to persist. There are, then, 
several options. The first is American withdrawal, in whatever 
terms it would be couched. It might be disguised as a retreat to 
“enclaves/’ from which the troops could then be removed. It 
might be arranged by an international conference, or by per¬ 
mitting a government in Saigon that would seek peace among 
contending South Vietnamese and then ask us to leave. This 
policy might be politically feasible; the same public relations 
firm that invented terms like “revolutionary development” can 
depict withdrawal as victory. Whether there is anyone in the 
executive branch with the courage or imagination to urge this 
course, I do not know. A number of senators are proposing, in 
essence, that this is the course we should pursue, as are such 
critics of the war as Walter Lippmann and Hans Morgenthau, 
if I understand them correctly. A detailed and quite sensible 
plan for arranging withdrawal along with new, more meaning¬ 
ful elections in the South is outlined by Philippe Devillers in Le 
Monde hebdomadaire of October 26, 1967. Variants can easily 
be imagined. What is central is the decision to accept the prin¬ 
ciple of Geneva that the problems of Vietnam be settled by the 
Vietnamese. 

A second possibility would be annihilation. No one doubts 
that we have the technological capacity for this, and only the 
sentimental doubt that we have the moral capacity as well. 
Bernard Fall predicted this outcome in an interview shortly 
before his death. “The Americans can destroy,” he said, “but 
they cannot pacify. They may win the war, but it will be the 
victory of the graveyard. Vietnam will be destroyed.” 


