parent.” 35 With many Japanese civilians, it felt that “Under the 
leadership of Chiang Kai-shek and with the support of the 
Western democratic powers which wanted to keep China in a 
semi-colonial state safe from the continental advance of the 
Japanese, China was rapidly becoming a military-fascist coun¬ 
try” 36 and had no right to dominate Manchuria. To use the 
kind of terminology favored by Secretary Rusk, it was unwilling 
to sacrifice the Manchurian people to their more powerful or 
better organized neighbors, and it engaged in serious efforts to 
win the hearts and minds of the people and to encourage the 
responsible Chinese leadership that had itself been working for 
Manchurian independence. 37 

In fact, a case can be made that “had it not been for Western 
intervention, which strengthened China, the Tibetans and 
Mongols would have simply resumed their own national sov¬ 
ereignty after the fall of the Manchu empire” in 1911, as would 
the Manchurians. With considerable Western prodding, the Na¬ 
tionalist government had abandoned the original demand for 
union with equality of Chinese, Manchus, Mongols, Moslems, 
and Tibetans and taken the position that China should rule the 
outer dominions. The West assumed that China would be under 
Western guidance and influence; “by confirming a maximum 
area for China it increased the sphere of future Western in¬ 
vestment and exploitation” 38 (a fact which adds a touch of 
irony to current Western complaints about “Chinese expansion¬ 
ism”). From this point of view, the independence of Man- 
chukuo could easily be rationalized as a step towards the 
emancipation of the peoples of East Asia from Western domi¬ 
nance. 

To be sure, the establishment of Japanese hegemony over 
Manchuria—and later, northern China as well—was motivated 
by the desire to secure Japanese rights and interests. A liberal 


182 


The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


professor of American history, Yasaka Takagi, observes that the 
general support for the Japanese military in 1931 was similar to 
the Manifest Destiny psychology underlying American expan¬ 
sion into Florida, Texas, California, Cuba, and Hawaii. 39 He 
describes the bandit-infested, warlord-controlled Manchurian 
region, then subject to the clash of expansionist Chinese Na¬ 
tionalism and Japanese imperialism, as similar to the Caribbean 
when the United States justified its Caribbean policy. He asks 
why there should be a Monroe Doctrine in America and an 
Open Door principle in Asia, and suggests an international con¬ 
ference to resolve the outstanding problems of the area, noting, 
however, that few Americans would “entertain even for a mo¬ 
ment the idea of letting an international conference define the 
Monroe Doctrine and review Mexican relations.” He points out, 
quite correctly, that “the peace machinery of the world is in 
itself primarily the creation of the dominant races of the earth, 
of those who are the greatest beneficiaries from the mainte¬ 
nance of the status quo ” 

Nevertheless, it appears that few Japanese were willing to 
justify the Manchurian incident and subsequent events on the 
“pragmatic” grounds of self-interest. Rather, they emphasized 
the high moral character of the intervention, the benefits it 
would bring to the suffering masses (once the terrorism had 
been suppressed), and the intention of establishing an “earthly 
paradise” in the independent state of Manchukuo (later, in 
China as well), defended from Communist attack by the power 
of Japan. Maruyama observes that “what our wartime leaders 
accomplished by their moralizing was not simply to deceive the 
people of Japan or of the world; more than anyone else they 
deceived themselves.” 40 To illustrate, he quotes the observa¬ 
tions of American Ambassador Joseph Grew on the “self-decep¬ 
tion and lack of realism” in the upper strata of Japanese society: 


183 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


... I doubt if one Japanese in a hundred really believes that they 
have actually broken the Kellogg Pact, the Nine-Power Treaty, 
and the Covenant of the League. A comparatively few thinking 
men are capable of frankly facing the facts, and one Japanese 
said to me: “Yes, we’ve broken every one of these instruments; 
we’ve waged open war; the arguments of ‘self-defense’ and ‘self- 
determination for Manchuria’ are rot; but we needed Manchuria, 
and that’s that.” But such men are in the minority. The great 
majority of Japanese are astonishingly capable of really fooling 
themselves. ... It isn’t that the Japanese necessarily has his 
tongue in his cheek when he signs the obligation. It merely means 
that when the obligation runs counter to his own interests, as he 
conceives them, he will interpret the obligation to suit himself 
and, according to his own lights and mentality, he will very likely 
be perfectly honest in so doing. . . . Such a mentality is a great 
deal harder to deal with than a mentality which, however brazen, 
knows that it is in the wrong. 
