barriers against Japanese immigrants, and presented a convincing 
picture of western encirclement. The most secure markets were 
those which Japan could control politically; an argument for 
further political expansion . . . against an iron ring of tariffs. 64 

It is hardly astonishing, then, that in 1937 Japan again began to 
expand at the expense of China. From the Japanese point of 
view, the new government of North China established in 1937 
represented the intention of the Japanese to keep North China 
independent of Nanking and the interest of the Chinese op¬ 
posed to colonization of the North by the dictatorial Kuomin- 
tang. 65 On December 22, 1938, Prince Konoye made the fol¬ 
lowing statement: 

. . . Japan demands that China, in accordance with the principle 
of equality between the two countries, should recognize the free¬ 
dom of residence and trade on the part of Japanese subjects in 
the interior of China, with a view to promoting the economic 
interests of both peoples; and that, in the light of the historical 


192 


The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


and economic relations between the two nations, China should 
extend to Japan facilities for the development of China’s natural 
resources, especially in the regions of North China and Inner 
Mongolia. 66 

There were to be no annexations, no indemnities. Thus a new 
order was to be established, which would defend China and 
Japan against Western imperialism, unequal treaties, and ex¬ 
traterritoriality. Its goal was not enrichment of Japan, but 
rather cooperation (on Japanese terms, of course). Japan would 
provide capital and technical assistance; at the same time, it 
would succeed in freeing itself from dependence on the West 
for strategic raw materials. 

Japanese leaders repeatedly made clear that they intended no 
territorial aggrandizement. To use the contemporary idiom,, 
they emphasized that their actions were “not intended as a 
threat to China” and that “China knows that Japan does not 
want a wider war,” although, of course, they would “do every¬ 
thing they can to protect the men they have there.” 67 They 
were quite willing to negotiate with the recalcitrant Chinese 
authorities, and even sought third-power intervention. 68 Such 
Japanese leaders as To jo and Matsuoka emphasized that no 
