enemy). This was, of course, prior to “the advent of massive 
American aid, and the GVN’s strategic hamlet program.” With 
the American takeover of the war, the emphasis shifted to mili¬ 
tary rather than political action, and ultimately, North Viet¬ 
namese involvement and perhaps control; “beginning in 1965, 
large numbers of regular army troops from North Vietnam were 
sent into South Vietnam.” 

In short, w T hat we see is a contrast between the Dai Viet and 
VNQDD, representing South Vietnamese nationalism, and the 
NLF, an extrinsic alien force. One must bear in mind that Sacks 
would undoubtedly accept Pike’s factual description as ac¬ 
curate, but, like Pike, would regard it as demonstrating nothing, 
since we are the ultimate arbiters of what counts as “genuine 
Vietnamese nationalism.” 

An interesting counterpoint to Sacks’s exposition of national¬ 
ist versus Communist forces is provided in David Wurfel’s care¬ 
ful analysis, in the same issue of Asian Survey, of the “Saigon 
political elite.” He argues that “this elite has not substantially 
changed its character in the last few years” (i.e., since 1962), 
though there may be a few modifications: “Formerly, only 
among the great landlords were there those who held significant 
amounts of both political and economic power; grandiose cor¬ 
ruption may have allowed others to attain that distinction in 
recent years.” Continuing, “the military men in post-Diem cabi¬ 
nets all served under Bao Dai and the French in a civil or 
military capacity.” Under the French, “those who felt most 
comfortable about entering the civil service were those whose 
families were already part of the bureaucratic-intellectual elite. 
By the early 1950’s they saw radicalism, in the form of the Viet 
Minh, as a threat to their own position. The present political 
elite is the legacy of these developments.” Although, he ob¬ 
serves, things might change, “the South Vietnamese cabinets 


48 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


and perhaps most of the rest of the political elite have been 
constituted by a highly westernized intelligentsia. Though the 
people of South Vietnam seem to be in a revolutionary mood, 
this elite is hardly revolutionary.” The NLF constitutes a 
“counter-elite,” less Westernized: of the NLF Central Commit¬ 
tee members, “only 3 out of 27 report studying in France.” 

The problem of “restructuring government” is further ana¬ 
lyzed by Ithiel Pool, along lines that parallel Sacks’s contribu¬ 
tion to this collection of “scholarly, objective studies.” He begins 
by formulating a general proposition: “I rule out of considera¬ 
tion here a large range of viable political settlements,” namely, 
those that involve “the inclusion of the Viet Cong in a coalition 
government or even the persistence of the Viet Cong as a legal 
organization in South Vietnam.” Such arrangements “are not 
acceptable”—to us, that is. The only acceptable settlement is 
one “imposed by the GVN despite the persisting great political 
power of the Viet Cong.” 

There is, of course, a certain difficulty: “. . . the Viet Cong is 
too strong to be simply beaten or suppressed.” It follows, then, 
that we must provide inducements to the Vietcong activists to 
join our enterprise. This should not prove too difficult, he feels. 
The Vietcong leadership consists basically of bureaucratic types 
who are on the make. Cognitive dissonance theory suggests that 
this “discontented leadership” has “the potential for making a 
total break when the going gets too rough.” We must therefore 
provide them with “a political rationalization for changing 
sides.” The problem is ideological. We must induce a change in 
the “image of reality” of the Vietcong cadres, replacing their 
“naive ideology,” which sees the GVN as “American puppets 
and supporters of exploiters, the tax collectors, the merchants, 
the big landlords, the police, and the evil men in the villages,” 
by a more realistic conception. We can do this by emphasizing 


49 


+ - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

hamlet home rule and preventing the use of military forces to 
collect rents, a suggestion which will be greeted with enthusi¬ 
asm in Saigon, no doubt. The opportunity to serve as function¬ 
aries for a central government which pursues such policies will 
attract the Vietcong cadres and thus solve our problem, that of 
excluding from the political process the organization that con¬ 
tains the effective political leaders. 

Others have expressed a rather different evaluation of the 
human quality and motivation of these cadres. For example, 
Joseph Buttinger contrasts the inability of the Diem regime to 
mobilize support with the success of the NLF: “. . . that people 
willing to serve their country were to be found in Vietnam no 
one could doubt. The Vietminh had been able to enlist them by 
the tens of thousands and to extract from them superhuman 
efforts and sacrifices in the struggle for independence.” 27 Mili¬ 
tary reports by the dozens relate the amazing heroism and 
