The Responsibility of Intellectuals. 


thing so complex it was felt that it would be a self-defeating 
thing.” 

Fortunately, this particular story has a happy ending. The 
remarks just quoted were made in February 1966, and within a 
few weeks, the Indian government had seen the light, as we 
read in a series of reports in the New York Times. The criticism, 
inside India, that “the American Government and the World 
Bank would like to arrogate to themselves the right to lay down 
the framework in which our economy must function,” was 
stilled (April 24); and the Indian government accepted the 
conditions for resumed economic aid, namely, “that India pro¬ 
vide easier terms for foreign private investment in fertilizer 
plants” and that the American investors “have substantial man¬ 
agement rights” (May 14). The development is summarized in 
a dispatch datelined April 28, from New Delhi, in these terms: 

There are signs of change. The Government has granted easy 
terms to private foreign investors in the fertilizer industry, is 
thinking about decontrolling several more industries and is ready 
to liberalize import policy if it gets sufficient foreign aid. . . . 
Much of what is happening now is a result of steady pressure 
from the United States and the International Bank for Recon¬ 
struction and Development, which for the last year have been 
urging a substantial freeing of the Indian economy and a greater 
scope for private enterprise. The United States pressure, in par¬ 
ticular, has been highly effective here because the United States 
provides by far the largest part of the foreign exchange needed to 
finance India’s development and keep the wheels of industry turn¬ 
ing. Call them “strings,” call them “conditions” or whatever one 
likes, India has little choice now but to agree to many of the 
terms that the United States, through the World Bank, is putting 
on its aid. For India simply has nowhere else to turn. 

The heading of the article refers to this development as In¬ 
dia’s “drift from socialism to pragmatism.” 

Even this was not enough, however. Thus we read a few 


355 


^ - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

months later, in the Christian Science Monitor (December 5), 
that American entrepreneurs insist “on importing all equipment 
and machinery when India has a tested capacity to meet some 
of their requirements. They have insisted on importing liquid 
ammonia, a basic raw material, rather than using indigenous 
naphtha which is abundantly available. They have laid down 
restrictions about pricing, distribution, profits, and management 
control.” The Indian reaction, I have already cited (see page 
336). 

In such ways as these, we help India develop towards an 
open society, one which, in Walt Rostow’s words, has a proper 
understanding of “the core of the American ideology,” namely, 
“the sanctity of the individual in relation to the state.” And in 
this way, too, w T e refute the simpleminded view of those Asians 
w T ho, to continue with Rostow’s phrasing, “believe or half- 
believe that the West has been driven to create and then to 
cling to its imperial holdings by the inevitable workings of capi¬ 
talist economies.” 40 

In fact, a major postwar scandal is developing in India as the 
United States, cynically capitalizing on India’s current torture, 
applies its economic power to implement India’s “drift from 
socialism to pragmatism.” 

In pursuing the aim of helping other countries to progress 
towards open societies, with no thought of territorial aggran¬ 
dizement, we are breaking no new ground. Hans Morgenthau 
has aptly described our traditional policy towards China as one 
of favoring “what you might call freedom of competition with 
regard to the exploitation of China.” 41 In fact, few imperialist 
powers have had explicit territorial ambitions. Thus in 1784, the 
British Parliament announced that “to pursue schemes of con¬ 
quest and extension of dominion in India are measures repug- 


356 



The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


nant to the wish, honor, and policy of this nation.” Shortly after, 
the conquest of India was in full swing. A century later, Britain 
announced its intentions in Egypt under the slogan “Interven¬ 
tion, Reform, Withdrawal.” It is unnecessary to comment on 
which parts of this promise were fulfilled, within the next half 
century. In 1936, on the eve of hostilities in North China, the 
Japanese stated their Basic Principles of National Policy. These 
included the use of moderate and peaceful means to extend her 
strength, to promote social and economic development, to erad¬ 
