Thomas feels that collectives could not have survived more than “a 
few years while primitive misery was being overcome.” I see nothing 
in his data to support this conclusion. The Palestinian experience has 
shown that collectives can remain both a social and an economic 
success over a long period. The success of Spanish collectivization, 

151 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


under war conditions, seems amazing. One can obviously not be cer¬ 
tain whether these successes could have been secured and extended 
had it not been for the combined fascist, Communist, and liberal 
attack, but I can find no objective basis for the almost universal 
skepticism. Again, this seems to me merely a matter of irrational 
prejudice. 

107. The following is a brief description by the anarchist writer 
Gaston Leval, Ne Franco, Ne Stalin, le collettivita amrchiche spagnole 
nella lotta contro Franco e la reazione staliniana (Milan, Istituto Editor- 
iale Italiano, 1952), pp. 303 f.; sections reprinted in Collectivites 
amrchistes en Espagne revolutionnaire, Noir et Rouge, undated. 

In the middle of the month of June, the attack began in Aragon on 
a grand scale and with hitherto unknown methods. The harvest was 
approaching. Rifles in hand, treasury guards under Communist orders 
stopped trucks loaded with provisions on the highways and brought 
them to their offices. A little later, the same guards poured into the 
collectives and confiscated great quantities of wheat under the authority 
of the general staff with headquarters in Barbastro. . . . Later open 
attacks began, under the command of Lister with troops withdrawn 
from the front at Belchite more than 50 kilometers away, in the month 
of August. . . . The final result was that 30 percent of the collectives 
were completely destroyed. In Alcolea, the municipal council that 
governed the collective was arrested; the people who lived in the 
Home for the Aged . . . were thrown out on the street. In Mas de las 
Matas, in Monzon, in Barbastro, on all sides, there were arrests. 
Plundering took place everywhere. The stores of the cooperatives and 
their grain supplies were rifled; furnishings were destroyed. The 
governor of Aragon, who was appointed by the central government 
after the dissolution of the Council of Aragon—which appears to have 
been the signal for the armed attack against the collectives—protested. 

He was told to go to the devil. 

On October 22, at the National Congress of Peasants, the delegation 
of the Regional Committee of Aragon presented a report of which 
the following is the summary: 
