change” and “despite their brutality and deceit, remain the only 
Vietnamese capable of rallying millions of their countrymen to 
sacrifice and hardship in the name of the nation and the only 
group not dependent on foreign bayonets for survival.” On our 
side are the military, and the “mandarins drawn from the mer¬ 
chant and landowning families” who had collaborated with the 
French just as they collaborate with us. 53 He points out that 
the existing social system defends privilege and that “many 
young Vietnamese of peasant origin join the Vietcong because 
the Communists . . . offer them their best hope of avoiding a life 
on the rung of the ladder where they began—at the bottom.” 
He describes the new construction in Saigon, virtually all “lux¬ 
ury apartments, hotels and office buildings financed by Chinese 
businessmen or affluent Vietnamese with relatives or connec¬ 
tions within the regime . . . destined to be rented to Americans,” 
while “Saigon’s workers live, as they always have, in fetid slums 


245 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


on the city’s outskirts.” But these are the lucky ones—lucky, 
that is, in comparison with the more than a million refugees, 
most of whom have left their homes “because they could no 
longer bear American and South Vietnamese bombs and shells” 
or the hundreds of thousands killed and wounded, victims 
largely of “the extraordinary firepower of American weaponry,” 
often turned against helpless villagers by cynical South Viet¬ 
namese officials. 54 He describes the American strategy as one of 
“creating a killing machine . . . and then turning this machine 
on the enemy in the hope that over the years enough killing will 
be done to force the enemy’s collapse through exhaustion and 
despair” 55 —the enemy being, for the most part, the rural popu¬ 
lation of South Vietnam. 

Sheehan concludes this account in the following way: “De¬ 
spite these misgivings, I do not see how we can do anything 
but continue to prosecute the war,” although he cannot fail to 
ask himself “whether the United States or any nation has the 
right to inflict this suffering and degradation on another people 
for its own ends.” The reason: any other course “might under¬ 
mine our entire position in Southeast Asia.” 

Many people have commented on the disparity between the 
