314 


Some Thoughts on Intellectuals and the Schools 


multiplying examples. One can only be appalled at the willing¬ 
ness of American intellectuals, who, after all, have access to the 
facts, to tolerate or even approve of this deceitfulness and 
hypocrisy. Instead of shocked denunciations, we hear and read 
mock-serious discussions of the rationality of the American at¬ 
tempt to drive the North Vietnamese by force towards the 
negotiations that they had been demanding; of the sincere 
American desire to permit the South Vietnamese people to elect 
freely the government of their choice (now that the domestic 
opposition has been crushed and all Communist and neutralist 
candidates excluded); of the “great complexity” of international 
affairs (which, strangely, did not seem to justify Russian domi¬ 
nation of East Europe or the Japanese attempt to impose a new 
order in Asia); of the judicious restraint of the administration, 
presumably, in refraining from genocide at a single stroke; and 
so on. Or what is worse, we read of the “bedrock vital interest 
of the United States” in demonstrating that its military power, 
once committed for whatever reason, cannot be forced to with¬ 
draw—a viewpoint which, had it been accepted by the world’s 
second superpower as well, would have brought the history of 
Western civilization to a close in 1962, and which, if consist¬ 
ently pursued, must lead either to a Pax Americana or to a 
devastating world conflict. 

Traditionally, the role of the intellectual, or at least his self- 
image, has been that of a dispassionate critic. Insofar as that 
role has been lost, the relation of the schools to intellectuals 
should, in fact, be one of self-defense. This is a matter that 
should be seriously considered. It is, to be sure, ridiculous to 
propose that the schools, in any country, deal objectively with 
contemporary history—they cannot sufficiently free themselves 
from the pressures of ideology for that. But it is not necessarily 
absurd to suppose that in Western democracies, at least, it 


315 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


should be possible to study in a fairly objective way the na¬ 
tional scandals of the past. It might be possible in the United 
States to study, let us say, the American occupation of the 
Philippines, leaving implicit its message for the present. Sup¬ 
pose that high school students were exposed to the best of 
current American scholarship, for example, George Taylor’s re¬ 
cent study for the Council on Foreign Relations, The Philip¬ 
pines and the United States. Here they would learn how, half a 
century after the bloody suppression of the native independ¬ 
ence movement at a cost of well over 100,000 lives in the years 
1898-1900, the country achieved nominal independence and the 
surface forms of democracy. They would also learn that the 
United States is guaranteed long-term military bases and un¬ 
paralleled economic privileges; that for three fourths of the 
population, living standards have not risen since the Spanish 
occupation; that 70 percent of the population is estimated to 
have tuberculosis; that profits flowing to the United States have 
exceeded new investment in each postwar year; that the demo¬ 
cratic forms give a new legitimacy to an old elite, allied now to 
American interests. They would read that “Colonial policy had 
tended to consolidate the power of an oligarchy that profited 
. . . from the free trade relationship and would be likely to re¬ 
spect, after independence, the rights and privileges of Ameri¬ 
cans”; that economically, “the contrast between the small upper 
class and the rest of the population . . . [is] . . . one of the most 
extreme in Asia”; that the consequences of American colonial 
policy were “that little was done to improve the lot of the 
average Filipino and that the Philippine economy was tied to 
the American to the advantage of the few”; and so on. They 
would then read the book’s final recommendation, that we go 
on with our good work: “In spite of our many shortcomings, the 
record shows that we are more than equal to the task.” It is at 


316 


Some Thoughts on Intellectuals and the Schools 


least possible that to a young mind, still uncontaminated by 
cant and sophistry, such a study can teach a revealing lesson, 
not only about what American dominance is likely to mean 
concretely, in the Third World, but also about the way in which 
American intellectuals are likely to interpret this impact. 

In general, the history of imperialism and of imperialist 
apologia, particularly as seen from the point of view of those at 
the wrong end of the guns, should be a central part of any 
civilized curriculum. But there are other aspects to a program of 
intellectual self-defense that should not be overlooked. In an 
age of science and technology, it is inevitable that their prestige 
will be employed as an ideological instrument—specifically,, 
