ment.” 13 

The Washington Conference arrangements were renegotiated 
in the London Naval Treaty of 1930 involving Japan, Great 
Britain, and the United States. The matter is discussed in detail 
in a study by James Crowley. 14 In the negotiations leading to 
this treaty, Secretary of State Stimson placed emphasis on “the 


171 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


★= 

unusual problems posed by the necessity of the United States to 
defend two coastlines and on the ‘great concessions’ which the 
American government had made at the time of the Washington 
Conference.” Crowley points out that “throughout the 1920’s, 
Japan faithfully adhered to the terms of the Washington Con¬ 
ference treaties.” At issue in the subsequent negotiations was 
the question whether Japan could maintain its primary objec¬ 
tive: “supremacy over the American fleet in Japanese home 
waters.” The London Treaty, in effect, required that Japan 
abandon this objective. The London Treaty “did not render 
England a second-class naval power, nor did it endanger the 
safety of the United States or its insular possessions in the Pa¬ 
cific,” but it did compromise “the principle of Japanese naval 
hegemony in Japan’s own waters.” 

The domestic opposition to the treaty in Japan was a very 
serious matter. It led to a strengthening of the role of the mili¬ 
tary, which felt, with reason, that the civilian leadership was 
seriously endangering Japanese security. The treaty also evoked 
the first of “the series of violent attacks on the legally appointed 
leaders of Japan which would characterize the political history 
of that country during the 1930’s” when Premier Hamaguchi, 
who was responsible for the treaty, was shot by “a patriotic 
youth” in 1930. An immediate consequence of the treaty was 
the adoption by the opposition party of a platform insisting on 
“the maintenance of Japan’s privileged position in Manchuria, 
and a foreign policy which discounted the necessity of coopera¬ 
tion with the Anglo-American nations in defense of Japan’s 
continental interests or in the cause of naval armament agree¬ 
ments.” In summary, it seems clear that the refusal of the 
United States to grant to Japan hegemony in its waters (while 
of course insisting on maintaining its owm hegemony in the 
Western Atlantic and Eastern Pacific) was a significant con- 
