briefly below (see note 33). 

It is interesting to see the first, somewhat oblique published reac¬ 
tions to The Politics of Escalation by those who defend our right to 
conquer South Vietnam and institute a government of our choice. For 
example, Robert Scalapino ( New York Times Magazine , December 

II, 1966) argues that the thesis of the book implies that our leaders 
are “diabolical.” Since no right-thinking person can believe this, the 
thesis is refuted. To assume otherwise would betray “irresponsibility,” 
in a unique sense of this term—a sense that gives an ironic twist to the 
title of this chapter. He goes on to point out the alleged central 
weakness in the argument of the book, namely, the failure to perceive 
that a serious attempt on our part to pursue the possibilities for a 
diplomatic settlement would have been interpreted by our adversaries 
as a sign of weakness. 


359 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


2. New York Times, October 14, 1965. 

3. Ibid., February 6, 1966. 

4. Boston Globe, November 19, 1965. 

5. At other times, Schlesinger does indeed display admirable scholarly 
caution. For example, in his introduction to The Politics of Escalation 
he admits that there may have been “flickers of interest in negotia¬ 
tions” on the part of Hanoi. As to the administration’s lies about 
negotiations and its repeated actions undercutting tentative initiatives 
towards negotiations, he comments only that the authors may have 
underestimated military necessity and that future historians may prove 
them wrong. This caution and detachment must be compared with 
Schlesinger’s attitude towards renewed study of the origins of the Cold 
War: in a letter to the New York Review of Books, October 20, 1966, 
he remarks that it is time to “blow the whistle” on revisionist attempts 
to show that the Cold War may have been the consequence of some¬ 
thing more than mere Communist belligerence. We are to believe, 
then, that the relatively straightforward matter of the origins of the 
Cold War is settled beyond discussion, whereas the much more com¬ 
plex issue of why the United States shies away from a negotiated 
settlement in Vietnam must be left to future historians to ponder. 

It is useful to bear in mind that the United States government itself 
is on occasion much less diffident in explaining why it refuses to 
contemplate a meaningful negotiated settlement. As is freely admitted, 
this solution would leave it without power to control the situation. See, 
for example, note 37. 

6. Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., A Thousand Days: John F. Kennedy in 
the White House (Boston, Houghton Mifflin Company, 1965), p. 
421. 

7. Walt W. Rostow, The View from the Seventh Floor (New York, 
Harper & Row, Publishers, 1964), p. 149. See also his United States in 
the World Arena (New York, Harper & Row, Publishers, 1960), p. 
244: “Stalin, exploiting the disruption and weakness of the postwar 
world, pressed out from the expanded base he had won during the 
Second World War in an effort to gain the balance of power in 
Eurasia . . . turning to the East, to back Mao and to enflame the 
North Korean and Indochinese Communists. . . .” 

8. For example, the article by CIA analyst George Carver, “The Face¬ 
less Viet Cong,” in Foreign Affairs, Vol. 44 (April 1966), pp. 347-72. 
See also note 33. 

360 


The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


9. Cf. Jean Lacouture, Vietmm: Between Two Truces (New York, 
Random House, 1966), p. 21. Diem’s analysis of the situation was 
shared by Western observers at the time. See, for example, the com¬ 
ments of William Henderson, Far Eastern specialist and executive, 
Council on Foreign Relations, in Richard W. Lindholm, ed., Vietnam: 
The First Five Years (East Lansing, Michigan State University Press, 
1959). He notes “the growing alienation of the intelligentsia,” “the 
renewal of armed dissidence in the South,” the fact that “security has 
noticeably deteriorated in the last two years,” all as a result of Diem’s 
“grim dictatorship,” and predicts “a steady worsening of the political 
climate in free Vietnam, culminating in unforeseen disasters.” 

10. See Bernard Fall, “Vietnam in the Balance,” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 
45 (October 1966), pp. 1-18. 

11. Stalin was pleased neither by the Titoist tendencies inside the 
Greek Communist party nor by the possibility that a Balkan federa¬ 
tion might develop under Titoist leadership. It is nevertheless con¬ 
ceivable that Stalin supported the Greek guerrillas at some stage of the 
rebellion, in spite of the difficulty in obtaining firm documentary evi¬ 
dence. Needless to say, no elaborate study is necessary to document 
