to bring the apocalypse of death and famine to millions—with few or 
no compensatory benefits to the ryot [peasant]” (p. 107). See also 
note 37. 

47. Cited in Paul Avrich, The Russian Anarchists (Princeton, N.J., 
Princeton University Press, 1967), pp. 93-94. A recent reformulation 
of this view is given by Anton Pannekoek, the Dutch scientist and 
spokesman for libertarian communism, in his Workers Councils (Mel¬ 
bourne, 1950), pp. 36-37: 

It is not for the first time that a ruling class tries to explain, and 
so to perpetuate, its rule as the consequences of an inborn difference 
between two kinds of people, one destined by nature to ride, the 
other to be ridden. The landowning aristocracy of former centuries 
defended their privileged position by boasting their extraction from a 
nobler race of conquerors that had subdued the lower race of common 
people. Big capitalists explain their dominating place by the assertion 
that they have brains and other people have none. In the same way 
now especially the intellectuals, considering themselves the rightful 
rulers of to-morrow, claim their spiritual superiority. They form the 
rapidly increasing class of university-trained officials and free pro¬ 
fessions, specialized in mental work, in study of books and of science, 

135 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


and they consider themselves as the people most gifted with intellect. 
Hence they are destined to be leaders of the production, whereas the 
ungifted mass shall execute the manual work, for which no brains are 
needed. They are no defenders of capitalism; not capital, but intellect 
should direct labor. The more so, since now society is such a compli¬ 
cated structure, based on abstract and difficult science, that only the 
highest intellectual acumen is capable of embracing, grasping and 
handling it. Should the working masses, from lack of insight, fail to 
acknowledge this need of superior intellectual lead, should they stupidly 
try to take the direction into their own hands, chaos and ruin will be 
the inevitable consequence. 

48. See note 7. Albert Parry has suggested that there are important 
similarities between the emergence of a scientific elite in the Soviet 
Union and the United States, in their growing role in decision making, 
citing Bell’s thesis in support. See the New York Times , March 27, 
1966, reporting on the Midwest Slavic Conference. 

49. Letter to Herzen and Ogareff, 1866, cited in Daniel Guerin, 
Jeunesse du socialisme libertaire (Paris, Librairie Marcel Riviere, 1959), 
p. 119. 

50. Rosa Luxemburg, The Russian Revolution, trans. Bertram D. 
Wolfe (Ann Arbor, University of Michigan Press, 1961), p. 71. 

51. Luxemburg, cited by Guerin, Jeunesse du socialisme libertaire, pp. 
106-7. 

52. Leninism or Marxism, in Luxemburg, op. cit., p. 102. 

53. For a very enlightening study of this matter, emphasizing domes¬ 
tic issues, see Michael Paul Rogin, The Intellectuals and McCarthy: 
The Radical Specter (Cambridge, Mass., the M.I.T. Press, 1967). 

54. The Spanish Republic and the Civil War: 1931-1939 (Princeton, 
N.J., Princeton University Press, 1965). 

55. Respectively, President of the Republic, Prime Minister from May 
until the Franco insurrection, and member of the conservative wing of 
the Popular Front selected by Azana to try to set up a compromise 
government after the insurrection. 

56. It is interesting that Douglas Pike’s very hostile account of the 
National Liberation Front, cited earlier, emphasizes the popular and 
voluntary element in its striking organizational successes. What he de¬ 
scribes, whether accurately or not one cannot tell, is a structure of 
interlocking self-help organizations, loosely coordinated and developed 
through persuasion rather than force—in certain respects, of a charac- 
136 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


ter that would have appealed to anarchist thinkers. Those who speak 
so freely of the “authoritarian Vietcong” may be correct, but they 
have presented little evidence to support their judgment. Of course, it 
must be understood that Pike regards the element of voluntary mass 
participation in self-help associations as the most dangerous and in¬ 
sidious feature of the NLF organizational structure. 

Also relevant is the history of collectivization in China, which, as 
compared with the Soviet Union, shows a much higher reliance on 
persuasion and mutual aid than on force and terror, and appears to 
have been more successful. See Thomas P. Bernstein, “Leadership and 
Mass Mobilisation in the Soviet and Chinese Collectivization Cam¬ 
paigns of 1929-30 and 1955-56: A Comparison/’ China Quarterly, 
No. 31 (July-September 1967), pp. 1-47, for some interesting and 
suggestive comments and analysis. 

The scale of the Chinese Revolution is so great and reports in depth 
