The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


With his usual lucidity, Churchill outlined the general position 
in a remark to his colleague of the moment, Joseph Stalin, at 
Teheran in 1943: . . the government of the world must be 

entrusted to satisfied nations, who wished nothing more for 
themselves than what they had. If the world-government were 
in the hand of hungry nations, there would always be danger. 
But none of us had any reason to seek for anything more. The 
peace would be kept by peoples who lived in their own way 
and were not ambitious. Our power placed us above the rest. 
We were like rich men dwelling at peace within their habita¬ 
tions. 7730 

For a translation of ChurchilFs biblical rhetoric into the 
jargon of contemporary social science, one may turn to the 
testimony of Charles Wolf, senior economist of the RAND Cor¬ 
poration, at the congressional committee hearings cited earlier: 

I am dubious that China’s fears of encirclement are going to be 
abated, eased, relaxed in the long-term future. But I would hope 
that what we do in Southeast Asia would help to develop within 
the Chinese body politic more of a realism and willingness to live 
with this fear than to indulge it by support for liberation move¬ 
ments, which admittedly depend on a great deal more than ex¬ 
ternal support . . . the operational question for American foreign 
policy is not whether that fear can be eliminated or substantially 
alleviated, but whether China can be faced with a structure of 
incentives, of penalties and rewards, of inducements that will 
make it willing to live with this fear . 31 

The point is further clarified by Thomas Schelling: “There is 
growing experience which the Chinese can profit from, that 
although the United States may be interested in encircling 
them, may be interested in defending nearby areas from them, 
it is, nevertheless, prepared to behave peaceably if they are. 7732 

In short, we are prepared to live peaceably within our—to be 
sure, rather extensive—habitations. And quite naturally, we are 


34 & 


* - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

offended by the undignified noises from the servants’ quarters. 
If, let us say, a peasant-based revolutionary movement tries to 
