passionate involvement of students in the civil rights move¬ 
ment, in the movement to end the war, in resistance, in com¬ 
munity organizing, already has changed the intellectual and 
moral climate of the universities at least. These stirrings of con¬ 
cern and commitment give some reason to hope that we will not 
repeat the crimes of the recent past. One thing is certain: we 
must never forget these crimes. 

It is just half a century since Randolph Bourne, in his re¬ 
markably perceptive essays, warned that “the old philosophy, 
the old radicalism . . . has found a perfectly definite level, and 
there is no reason to think it will not remain there. Its flowering 
appears in the technical organization of the war by an earnest 
group of young liberals, who direct their course by an opportu- 


5 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


nist program of state socialism at home and a league of benevo¬ 
lently imperialistic nations abroad.” The pragmatic liberalism 
“that worked when we were trying to get that material founda¬ 
tion for American life in which more impassioned living could 
flourish” was now helpless in “creating new values and setting 
at once a large standard to which the nations might repair.” He 
wrote of the enthusiasm with which liberal intellectuals ac¬ 
cepted the war, once America had joined in, of the “high mood 
of confidence and self-righteousness,” the “keen sense of control 
over events.” 

The war has revealed a younger intelligentsia, trained up in the 
pragmatic dispensation, immensely ready for the executive order¬ 
ing of events, pitifully unprepared for the intellectual interpreta¬ 
tion or the idealistic focusing of ends. . . . They have absorbed 
the secret of scientific method as applied to political administra¬ 
tion. They are liberal, enlightened, aware. They are touched with 
creative intelligence toward the solution of political and industrial 
problems. They are a wholly new force in American life, the 
product of the swing in the colleges from a training that empha¬ 
sized classical studies to one that emphasized political and eco¬ 
nomic values. Practically all this element, one would say, is lined 
up in service of the w r ar technique. There seems to have been a 
peculiar congeniality between the war and these men. It is as if 
the war and they had been waiting for each other. . . . What is 
significant is that it is the technical side of the war that appeals to 
them, not the interpretative or political side. The formulation of 
values and ideals, the production of articulate and suggestive 
thinking, had not, in their education, kept pace, to any extent 
whatever, with their technical aptitude. . . . [Dewey’s] disciples 
have learned all too literally the instrumental attitude toward life, 
and, being immensely intelligent and energetic, they are making 
themselves efficient instruments of the war technique, accepting 
with little question the ends as announced from above . 2 

Bourne is describing, not the “New Frontier,” the “new man¬ 
darins” of the 1960s, but the liberal and radical intellectuals of 


6 



Introduction 


1917. His essay is entitled “Twilight of Idols.” With the Vietnam 
war, twilight has turned to midnight. 

In the same essay, Bourne speaks with hope of the “thorough 
malcontents” with their 

Irritation at things as they are, disgust at the frustrations and 
aridities of American life, deep dissatisfaction with self and with 
the groups that give themselves as hopeful—out of such moods 
there might be hammered new values. The malcontents would be 
men and women who could not stomach the war, or the reac¬ 
tionary idealism that has followed in its train. They are quite 
through with the professional critics and classicists who have let 
cultural values die through their own personal ineptitude. Yet 
these malcontents have no intention of being cultural vandals, 
only to slay. They are not barbarians, but seek the vital and the 
sincere everywhere . 3 

He speaks with hope that “a more skeptical, malicious, des¬ 
perate, ironical mood may actually be the sign of more vivid 
and more stirring life fermenting in America today. . . . Malcon- 
tentedness may be the beginning of promise.” The postwar re¬ 
pression all but destroyed this promise. Today, as the Cold War 
ideology is collapsing and American power is proving incapable 
of achieving dominance over Asia, there is once again the smell 
of repression in the air. If we can learn anything from history, 
we will find a way to avoid the arrogance and divisiveness that 
has been the curse of the left and unite to resist this repression, 
to realize the promise that might grow from malcontentedness, 
