that as honest men the students and junior faculty are attempt¬ 
ing to find out the truth for themselves rather than ceding the 
responsibility to “experts” or to government; and it might be 
that they react with indignation to what they discover. These 
possibilities Kristol does not reject. They are simply unthink¬ 
able, unworthy of consideration. More accurately, these possi¬ 
bilities are inexpressible; the categories in which they are 
formulated (honesty, indignation) simply do not exist for the 
tough-minded social scientist. 

In this implicit disparagement of traditional intellectual val¬ 
ues, Kristol reflects attitudes that are fairly widespread in aca¬ 
demic circles. I do not doubt that these attitudes are in part a 
consequence of the desperate attempt of the social and behav¬ 
ioral sciences to imitate the surface features of sciences that 
really have significant intellectual content. But they have other 
sources as well. Anyone can be a moral individual, concerned 
with human rights and problems; but only a college professor, a 
trained expert, can solve technical problems by “sophisticated” 
methods. Ergo, it is only problems of the latter sort that are 
important or real. Responsible, nonideological experts will give 
advice on tactical questions; irresponsible “ideological types” 
will “harangue” about principle and trouble themselves over 
moral issues and human rights, or over the traditional problems 
of man and society, concerning which “social and behavioral 
science” have nothing to offer beyond trivialities. Obviously, 
these emotional, ideological types are irrational, since, being 


339 


if - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

well off and having power in their grasp, they shouldn’t worry 
about such matters. 

At times this pseudoscientific posing reaches levels that are 
almost pathological. Consider the phenomenon of Herman 
Kahn, for example. Kahn has been both denounced as immoral 
and lauded for his courage. By people who should know better, 
his On Thermonuclear War has been described “without quali¬ 
fication . . . [as] . . . one of the great works of our time” (Stuart 
Hughes). The fact of the matter is that this is surely one of the 
emptiest works of our time, as can be seen by applying to it the 
intellectual standards of any existing discipline, by tracing some 
of its “well-documented conclusions” to the “objective studies” 
from which they derive, and by following the line of argument, 
where detectable. Kahn proposes no theories, no explanations, 
no empirical assumptions that can be tested against their conse¬ 
