force 55 to be employed to guarantee political stability—that is, 
when it is the United States that exercises this force. In fact, he 


247 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


goes still further. We even have the right to use our military 
force to carry out political and social change. Thus the pacifica¬ 
tion program, which is under American military control, 
“involves nothing less than the restructuring of Vietnamese soci¬ 
ety,” but it is, in his view, a legitimate, in fact laudable pro¬ 
gram. 56 Thus the principle that we are fighting to preserve is 
not the principle of nonintervention by military force in the 
affairs of other nations. Rather, it is the principle that the 
United States, and the United States alone, may intervene in 
the internal affairs of other nations to guarantee political sta¬ 
bility and even to restructure their society. Secretary Mc¬ 
Namara is of course aware of the fact that the role of North 
Vietnam in “externally directed violence” has always been, and 
now remains, far slighter than our own; it is the department that 
he headed—the Department of Defense—that has provided most 
of the evidence on this matter. But North Vietnamese inter¬ 
ference has been in support of social change of a sort that we 
define as illegitimate, whereas ours is in support of stability 
(or occasionally, restructuring) that we have determined to be 
quite proper. To be concise, we are fighting in Vietnam in ful¬ 
fillment of our role as international judge and executioner— 
nothing less. 

Secretary McNamara’s formulation of our goals in Vietnam is 
given in calm and measured tones and is for this reason decep¬ 
tively reassuring. With less subtlety, the same presuppositions 
are expressed in the words of a congressman from Texas, 
twenty years ago: 

No matter what else we have of offensive or defensive weapons, 
without superior air power America is a bound and throttled 
giant; impotent and easy prey to any yellow dwarf with a pocket 
knife. 67 


248 

