searchlights on near-by waters. 

Many British warships patrolled the entire Strait today, deter¬ 
mined to prevent interference with Britain’s control over the en¬ 
trance to the Mediterranean, a vital place in the British “lifeline 
to the East.” 

This action followed repeated warnings to the Spanish Gov¬ 
ernment and yesterday’s decree that no more fighting would be 
permitted in Gibraltar Harbor. The British at Gibraltar had be¬ 
come increasingly nervous after the shelling of Algeciras by the 
Loyalist battleship Jaime I. 

Although British neutrality is still maintained, the patrol of the 
Strait and the closing of the harbor will aid the military Rebels 
because Loyalist warships cannot attempt to take Algeciras, now 
in Rebel hands, and completely isolate the Rebels from Morocco . 
The Rebels now can release some troops, who were rushed back 
to Algeciras, for duty further north in the drive for Madrid. 

It was reported in Gibraltar tonight that the Rebels had sent a 
transport across the Strait and had landed more troops from 
Morocco for use in the columns that are marching northward 
from headquarters at Seville. 

This was the second time this year that Britain warned a power 
when she believed her measure of Mediterranean control was 
threatened, and it remains to be seen w r hether the Madrid Gov¬ 
ernment will flout the British as the Italians did. If it attempts to 
do so, the British gunners of the Gibraltar fort have authority to 
fire warning shots. What will happen if such shots go unheeded is 
obvious. 

All the British here refer to the Madrid Government as the 
“Communists” and there is no doubt where British sympathies 
now lie, encouraged by the statement of General Francisco 

117 


if - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

Franco, leader of the Rebels, that he is not especially cooperating 
with Italy. 

The British Government has ordered Spaniards here to cease 
plotting or be expelled and has asked Britons “loyally to refrain 
from either acting or speaking publicly in such a manner as to 
display marked partiality or partisanship.” 

