
About these events, Jackson has the following comments: 

On August 11 the government announced the dissolution of the 
Consejo de Aragon , the anarchist-dominated administration which 
had been recognized by Largo Caballero in December, 1936. The 
peasants were known to hate the Consejo, the anarchists had de¬ 
serted the front during the Barcelona fighting, and the very exist¬ 
ence of the Consejo was a standing challenge to the authority of 
the central government. For all these reasons Negrin did not 
hesitate to send in troops, and to arrest the anarchist officials. 
Once their authority had been broken, however, they were re¬ 
leased. 101 

These remarks are most interesting. Consider first the charge 
that the anarchists had deserted the front during the May Days. 
It is true that elements of certain anarchist and POUM divisions 
were prepared to march on Barcelona, but after the “fragile 
truce” was established on May 5, they did not do so; no anar¬ 
chist forces even approached Barcelona to defend the Barcelona 
proletariat and its institutions from attack. However, a motor¬ 
ized column of 5,000 Assault Guards was sent from the front by 
the government to break the “fragile truce.” 102 Hence the only 
forces to “desert the front” during the Barcelona fighting were 


104 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


those dispatched by the government to complete the job of 
dismantling the revolution, by force. Recall Orwell’s observa¬ 
tions quoted above, pages 101-2. 

What about Jackson’s statement that “the peasants were 
known to hate the Consejo”? As in the other cases I have cited, 
Jackson gives no indication of any evidence on which such 
a judgment might be based. The most detailed investigation 
of the collectives is from anarchist sources, and they indicate 
that Aragon was one of the areas where collectivization was 
most widespread and successful. 103 Both the CNT and the 
UGT Land Workers’ Federation were vigorous in their support 
for collectivization, and there is no doubt that both were mass 
organizations. A number of nonanarchists, observing collecti¬ 
vization in Aragon firsthand, gave very favorable reports and 
stressed the voluntary character of collectivization. 104 Accord¬ 
ing to Gaston Leval, an anarchist observer who carried out 
detailed investigation of rural collectivization, “in Aragon 75 
percent of small proprietors have voluntarily adhered to the 
new order of things,” and others were not forced to involve 
themselves in collectives. 105 Other anarchist observers—Augus¬ 
tin Souchy in particular—gave detailed observations of the 
functioning of the Aragon collectives. Unless one is willing to 
assume a fantastic degree of falsification, it is impossible to 
reconcile their descriptions with the claim that “the peasants 
were known to hate the .Consejo”—unless, of course, one re¬ 
stricts the term “peasant” to “individual farm owner,” in which 
case it might very well be true, but would justify disbanding 
the Council only on the assumption that the rights of the indi¬ 
vidual farm owner must predominate, not those of the landless 
worker. There is little doubt that the collectives were economi¬ 
cally successful, 106 hardly likely if collectivization were forced 
and hated by the peasantry. 


105 


* - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

I have already cited Bolloten’s general conclusion, based on 
very extensive documentary evidence, that while the individual 
farmer may have viewed the development of collectivized agri¬ 
culture with dismay, “the farm workers of the Anarchosyndical- 
ist CNT and the Socialist UGT saw in it, on the contrary, the 
commencement of a new era.” This conclusion seems quite rea¬ 
sonable, on the basis of the materials that are available. With 
respect to Aragon, specifically, he remarks that the “debt-ridden 
peasants were strongly affected by the ideas of the CNT and 
FAI, a factor that gave a powerful spontaneous impulse to 
collective farming,” though difficulties are cited by anarchist 
sources, which in general appear to be quite honest about fail¬ 
ures. Bolloten cites two Communist sources, among others, to 
the effect that about 70 percent of the population in rural areas 
of Aragon lived in collectives (p. 71); he adds that “many of 
the region’s 450 collectives were largely voluntary,” although 
“the presence of militiamen from the neighbouring region of 
Catalonia, the immense majority of whom were members of the 
CNT and FAI” was “in some measure” responsible for the ex¬ 
tensive collectivization. He also points out that in many in¬ 
stances peasant proprietors who were not compelled to adhere 
to the collective system did so for other reasons: “. . . not only 
were they prevented from employing hired labour and dispos¬ 
ing freely of their crops . . . but they were often denied all 
benefits enjoyed by members” (p. 72). Bolloten cites the attempt 
of the Communists in April 1937 to cause dissension in “areas 
where the CNT and UGT had established collective farms by 
mutual agreement” (p. 195), leading in some cases to pitched 
