
working. . . . even [the munitions industry in Catalonia] were 
harassed by the new bureaucratic organs of the Ministry of Sup¬ 
ply . 80 

He quotes the bourgeois President of Catalonia, Companys, as 
saying that “workers in the arms factories in Barcelona had 
been working 56 hours and more each week and that no cases 
of sabotage or indiscipline had taken place/’ until the workers 
were demoralized by the bureaucratization—later, militariza¬ 
tion—imposed by the central government and the Communist 
party. 81 His own conclusion is that “the Valencia Government 
was now using the P.S.U.C. against the C.N.T.—but not . . . 
because the Catalan workers were giving trouble, but because 
the Communists wished to weaken them before destroying 
them.” 

The cited correspondence from Companys to Prieto, accord¬ 
ing to Vernon Richards (p. 47), presents evidence showing the 
success of Catalonian war industry under collectivization and 
demonstrating how “much more could have been achieved had 
the means for expanding the industry not been denied them by 
the Central Government.” Richards also cites testimony by a 
spokesman for the subsecretariat of munitions and armament of 
the Valencia government admitting that “the war industry of 
Catalonia had produced ten times more than the rest of Spanish 
industry put together and [agreeing] . . . that this output could 
have been quadrupled as from beginning of September* if 
Catalonia had had access to the necessary means for purchasing 
raw materials that were unobtainable in Spanish territory.” It is 
important to recall that the central government had enormous 
gold reserves (soon to be transmitted to the Soviet Union), so 
that raw materials for Catalan industry could probably have 

* The quoted testimony is from September 1, 1937; presumably, the reference 
is to September 1936. 


89 


+ - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

been purchased, despite the hostility of the Western democ¬ 
racies to the Republic during the revolutionary period (see 
below). Furthermore, raw materials had repeatedly been re¬ 
quested. On September 24, 1936, Juan Fabregas, the CNT 
delegate to the Economic Council of Catalonia who was in part 
responsible for the collectivization decree cited earlier, reported 
that the financial difficulties of Catalonia were created by the 
