accommodating 5,500,000 people. The collective hamlets, Lee 
informs us, were set up with considerable ruthlessness. 

Families were ordered to move from their farm homes with little 
or no notice, even if the collective hamlets were not ready. Some 
farmers were forced to move just before the sowing season, mak¬ 
ing it impossible for them to plant any seeds that year, while 
others were ordered to move just before harvest. Many farm¬ 
houses seem to have been destroyed by troops engaged in mop-up 
operations before preparations had been made for the farmers’ 
relocation. The only concern of the military was to cut off the 
guerrillas’ sources of food supply and their contacts with the 
farmers. [Pp. 26 f.] 

There is no point in supplying further details, which will be 
familiar to anyone who has been reading the American press 
since 1962. 

The collective-hamlet program was fairly successful, though 
it was necessary to prevent insurgents from “assaulting the 
weakly protected collective hamlets and . . . plundering food 
and grain” and to prevent infiltration. According to a report in 
1939, many of the residents of the hamlets continued to “sym¬ 
pathize with Communism and secretly plan to join the insur¬ 
gents,” and the Communists continued to exploit the farmers’ 
grievances with skill (Lee, pp. 33 f.). Vice-Governor Itagaki 
formulated the problem succinctly: “We are not afraid of 
Communist propaganda; but we are worried because the mate¬ 
rial for propaganda can be found in the farmers’ lives. We are 
not afraid of the ignition of fire; rather we are afraid of the 
seeping oil” (p. 34). 


198 



The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


The Japanese undertook a number of what are now called 
population control methods,” including registration of resi¬ 
dents, issuance of residence certificates, unscheduled searches, 
and so on. 80 They also made use of the method of reward and 
punishment recommended by more recent theorists of pacifica¬ 
tion (see Lee, pp. 39-40). 81 The Japanese understood that “it was 
totally unrealistic to expect reforms or innovations to be ini¬ 
tiated by those who were already well off” and therefore re¬ 
placed the former “local gentry’ 5 by “young and capable ad¬ 
ministrative personnel” who were “trained to assist the local 
administrators through the Hsueh-ho-hui, the government- 
sponsored organization to recruit mass support for the Man- 
chukuo regime” (p. 46). Many abuses at the village level were 
also eliminated, in an attempt to wean the villagers from their 
traditional belief that the government is merely an agency of 
exploitation. Extensive propaganda efforts were conducted to 
win the hearts and minds of the villagers (cf. pp. 55 f.). In 
comparison with American efforts at pacification, the Japanese 
appear to have achieved considerable success—if these docu¬ 
ments can be believed—in part, apparently, because Japan was 
not committed to guaranteeing the persistence of the old semi- 
feudal order and was less solicitous of property rights. The 
reports indicate that by 1940, the Communist guerrillas had 
been virtually exterminated in Manchuria. 

A secret report of the office of information of the government 
of Manchukuo in April 1939 describes the achievements of 
pacification in Tunghwa Province in glowing terms: 

It must be said that the economic and spiritual impact of the 
reconstruction activities on the citizens of the province has been 
very uplifting. We have observed an increase in the areas under 
cultivation as a result of the recovery of abandoned lands; an 
increase in agricultural production owing to improvements in 

199 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


seeds; an increase of farmers’ cash incomes as a result of im¬ 
provement in market facilities; remarkable progress among mer¬ 
chants and industrialists assisted by government loans; and the 
winning of public support through medical treatment and the 
administration of medicine. 82 

A secret report of November 1939 describes the situation in a 
province where “revolutionary development” was not yet quite 
so successful and insurgents still operated: 

. . . most atrociously, these insurgents pillage goods, and kill and 
wound men and animals. They are also systematically conducting 
Communist indoctrination operations in various villages. As a 
result, many villagers are led astray by the insurgents’ propa¬ 
ganda and begin to work for the insurgents, passively or politi¬ 
cally. All this adds to the burden carried by the pacification 
forces. 83 
