fied Germany would not be permitted to join a Western mili¬ 
tary alliance. 12 And he has also momentarily forgotten his own 
characterization of the strategy of the Truman and Eisenhower 
administrations: “to avoid any serious negotiation with the So¬ 
viet Union until the West could confront Moscow with German 
rearmament within an organized European framework, as a fait 
accompli ” 13 —to be sure, in defiance of the Potsdam agree¬ 
ments. 

But most interesting of all is Rostow’s reference to Iran. The 
facts are that there was a Russian attempt to impose by force a 
pro-Soviet government in Northern Azerbaijan that would 
grant the Soviet Union access to Iranian oil. This was rebuffed 
by superior Anglo-American force in 1946, at which point the 
more powerful imperialism obtained full rights to Iranian oil for 
itself, with the installation of a pro-Western government. We 
recall what happened when, for a brief period in the early 


328 



Some Thoughts on Intellectuals and the Schools 


1950s, the only Iranian government with something of a popu¬ 
lar base experimented with the curious idea that Iranian oil 
should belong to the Iranians. What is interesting, however, is 
the description of Northern Azerbaijan as part of “the free 
world spectrum of defense.” It is pointless, by now, to comment 
on the debasement of the phrase “free world.” But by what law 
of nature does Iran, with its resources, fall within Western do¬ 
minion? The bland assumption that it does is most revealing of 
deep-seated attitudes towards the conduct of foreign affairs. 

In addition to this growing lack of concern for truth, we find, 
in recent statements, a real or feigned naivete with regard to 
American actions that reaches startling proportions. For exam¬ 
ple, Arthur Schlesinger has recently characterized our Vietna¬ 
mese policies of 1954 as “part of our general program of inter¬ 
national goodwill.” 14 Unless intended as irony, this remark 
shows either a colossal cynicism or an inability, on a scale that 
defies comment, to comprehend elementary phenomena of con¬ 
temporary history. Similarly, what is one to make of the testi¬ 
mony of Thomas Schelling before the House Foreign Affairs 
Committee, January 27, 1966, in which he discusses the two 
great dangers if all Asia “goes Communist”? 16 First, this would 
exclude “the United States and what we call Western civiliza¬ 
tion from a large part of the world that is poor and colored and 
potentially hostile.” Second, “a country like the United States 
probably cannot maintain self-confidence if just about the 
greatest thing it ever attempted, namely to create the basis for 
decency and prosperity and democratic government in the un¬ 
derdeveloped world, had to be acknowledged as a failure or as 
an attempt that we wouldn’t try again.” It surpasses belief that 
a person with even minimal acquaintance with the record of 
American foreign policy could produce such statements. 

It surpasses belief, that is, unless we look at the matter from a 


329 


*= AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

more historical point of view, and place such statements in the 
context of the hypocritical moralism of the past; for example, of 
Woodrow Wilson, who was going to teach the Latin Americans 
the art of good government, and who wrote (1902) that it is 
“our peculiar duty” to teach colonial peoples “order and self- 
control . . . [and] . . . the drill and habit of law T and obedience.” 
Or of the missionaries of the 1840s, who described the hideous 
and degrading opium wars as “the result of a great design of 
Providence to make the wickedness of men subserve his pur¬ 
poses of mercy toward China, in breaking through her wall of 
exclusion, and bringing the empire into more immediate contact 
with western and Christian nations.” Or, to approach the 
present, of A. A. Berle, who, in commenting on the Dominican 
intervention, has the impertinence to attribute the problems of 
the Caribbean countries to imperialism —Russian imperial¬ 
ism. 16 

As a final example of this failure of skepticism, consider the 
remarks of Henry Kissinger in concluding his presentation in a 
Harvard-Oxford television debate on American Vietnam poli¬ 
cies. He observed, rather sadly, that what disturbs him most is 
that others question not our judgment but our motives—a re¬ 
markable comment on the part of one whose professional con¬ 
cern is political analysis, that is, analysis of the actions of gov¬ 
ernments in terms of motives that are unexpressed in official 
propaganda and perhaps only dimly perceived by those whose 
acts they govern. No one would be disturbed by an analysis of 
the political behavior of Russians, French, or Tanzanians, ques¬ 
tioning their motives and interpreting their actions in terms of 
long-range interests, perhaps well concealed behind official 
rhetoric. But it is an article of faith that American motives are 
pure and not subject to analysis (see note 1). Although it is 
nothing new in American intellectual history—or, for that mat- 
