reaffirmed” our interest “in the progress of the people across the 
Pacific”) and his advisers, who deserve “the understanding sup¬ 
port of those who want restraint.” It is these men who deserve 
the credit for the fact that “the bombing of the North has been 
the most accurate and the most restrained in modern warfare” 
—a solicitude which will be appreciated by the inhabitants, or 
former inhabitants, of Nam Dinh and Phu Ly and Vinh. It is 
these men, too, who deserve the credit for what was reported 
by Malcolm Browne as long ago as May 1965: “In the South, 


335 


*= AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

huge sectors of the nation have been declared ‘free bombing 
zones/ in which anything that moves is a legitimate target. Tens 
of thousands of tons of bombs, rockets, napalm and cannon fire 
are poured into these vast areas each week. If only by the laws 
of chance, bloodshed is believed to be heavy in these raids.” 

Fortunately for the developing countries, Bundy assures us, 
“American democracy has no enduring taste for imperialism,” 
and “taken as a whole, the stock of American experience, un¬ 
derstanding, sympathy and simple knowledge is now much the 
most impressive in the world.” It is true that “four-fifths of all 
the foreign investing in the world is now done by Americans” 
and that “the most admired plans and policies . . . are no better 
than their demonstrable relation to the American interest”—just 
as it is true, so we read in the same issue of Foreign Affairs, that 
the plans for armed action against Cuba were put into motion a 
few weeks after Mikoyan visited Havana, “invading what had 
so long been an almost exclusively American sphere of influ¬ 
ence.” Unfortunately, such facts as these are often taken by 
unsophisticated Asian intellectuals as indicating a “taste for im¬ 
perialism.” For example, a number of Indians have expressed 
their “near exasperation” at the fact that “we have done every¬ 
thing we can to attract foreign capital for fertilizer plants, but 
the American and the other Western private companies know 
we are over a barrel, so they demand stringent terms which we 
just cannot meet ,” 22 while “Washington . . . doggedly insists 
that deals be made in the private sector with private enter¬ 
prise .” 23 But this reaction, no doubt, simply reveals once again 
how the Asian mind fails to comprehend the “diffuse and com¬ 
plex concepts” of Western thought. 

It may be useful to study carefully the “new, good ideas 
about Vietnam” that are receiving a “prompt and respectful 
hearing” in Washington these days. The United States Govern- 


336 



The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


ment Printing Office is an endless source of insight into the 
moral and intellectual level of this expert advice. In its publica¬ 
tions one can read, for example, the testimony of Professor 
David N. Rowe, director of graduate studies in international 
relations at Yale University, before the House Committee on 
Foreign Affairs (see note 15). Professor Rowe proposes (p. 
266) that the United States buy all surplus Canadian and Aus¬ 
tralian wheat, so that there will be mass starvation in China. 
These are his words: “Mind you, I am not talking about this as 
a weapon against the Chinese people. It will be. But that is only 
incidental. The weapon will be a weapon against the Govern¬ 
ment because the internal stability of that country cannot be 
sustained by an unfriendly Government in the face of general 
starvation.” Professor Rowe will have none of the sentimental 
moralism that might lead one to compare this suggestion with, 
say, the Ostpolitik of Hitler's Germany. 24 Nor does he fear the 
impact of such policies on other Asian nations, for example 
Japan. He assures us, from his “very long acquaintance with 
Japanese questions,” that “the Japanese above all are people who 
respect power and determination.” Hence “they will not be so 
much alarmed by American policy in Vietnam that takes off 
from a position of power and intends to seek a solution based 
upon the imposition of our power upon local people that we are 
in opposition to.” What would disturb the Japanese is “a policy 
of indecision, a policy of refusal to face up to the problems [in 
China and Vietnam] and to meet our responsibilities there in a 
positive way,” such as the way just cited. A conviction that we 
were “unwilling to use the power that they know we have” 
might “alarm the Japanese people very intensely and shake the 
degree of their friendly relations with us.” In fact, a full use of 
American power would be particularly reassuring to the Japa¬ 
nese, because they have had a demonstration “of the tremen- 


337 


yr - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

dous power in action of the United States . . . because they have 
felt our power directly.” This is surely a prime example of the 
