3S1 


*= AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

A third option would be an invasion of North Vietnam. This 
would saddle us with two unwinnable guerrilla wars instead of 
one, but if the timing is right, it might be used as a device to 
rally the citizenry around the flag. 

A fourth possibility is an attack on China. We could then 
abandon Vietnam and turn to a winnable war directed against 
Chinese industrial capacity. Such a move should win the 
election. No doubt this prospect also appeals to that insane 
rationality called “strategic thinking/’ If we intend to keep 
armies of occupation or even strong military bases on the Asian 
mainland, we would do well to make sure that the Chinese do 
not have the means to threaten them. Of course, there is the 
danger of a nuclear holocaust, but it is difficult to see why this 
should trouble those whom John McDermott calls the “crisis 
managers,” the same men who were willing, in 1962, to accept a 
high probability of nuclear war to establish the principle that 
we, and we alone, have the right to keep missiles on the borders 
of a potential enemy. 

There are many who regard “negotiations” as a realistic alter¬ 
native, but I do not understand the logic or even the content of 
this proposal. If we stop bombing North Vietnam we might 
well enter into negotiations with Hanoi, but there would then 
be very little to discuss. As to South Vietnam, the only negotia¬ 
ble issue is the withdrawal of foreign troops; other matters can 
only be settled among whatever Vietnamese groups have sur¬ 
vived the American onslaught. The call for “negotiations” 
seems to me not only empty, but actually a trap for those who 
oppose the war. If we do not agree to withdraw our troops, the 
negotiations will be deadlocked, the fighting will continue, 
American troops will be fired on and killed, the military will 
have a persuasive argument to escalate, to save American lives. 
In short, the Symington solution: we offer them peace on our 


382 


On Resistance 


terms, and if they refuse—the victory of the graveyard. 

Of the realistic options, only withdrawal (however dis¬ 
guised) seems to me at all tolerable, and resistance, as a tactic 
of protest, must be designed so as to increase the likelihood that 
this option will be selected. Furthermore, the time in which to 
take such action may be very short. The logic of resorting to 
resistance as a tactic for ending the war is fairly clear. There is 
no basis for supposing that those who will make the major 
policy decisions are open to reason on the fundamental issues, 
in particular the issue of whether we, alone among the nations 
of the world, have the authority and the competence to deter¬ 
mine the social and political institutions of Vietnam. What is 
more, there is little likelihood that the electoral process will 
bear on the major decisions. As I have pointed out, the issue may 
be settled before the next election. Even if it is not, it is hardly 
likely that a serious choice will be offered at the polls. And if by 
a miracle such a choice is offered, how seriously can we take 
the campaign promises of a “peace candidate” after the experi¬ 
ence of 1964? Given the enormous dangers of escalation and its 
hateful character, it makes sense, in such a situation, to search 
for ways to raise the domestic cost of American aggression, to 
raise it to a point where it cannot be overlooked by those who 
have to calculate such costs. One must then consider in what 
ways it is possible to pose a serious threat. Many possibilities 
come to mind: a general strike, university strikes, attempts to 
hamper war production and supply, and so on. 

Personally, I feel that disruptive acts of this sort would be 
justified were they likely to be effective in averting an imminent 
tragedy. I am skeptical, however, about their possible effective¬ 
ness. At the moment, I cannot imagine a broad base for such 
action, in the white community at least, outside the universities. 
Forcible repression would not, therefore, prove very difficult. 


383 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


My guess is that such actions would, furthermore, primarily 
involve students and younger faculty from the humanities and 
the theological schools, with a scattering of scientists. The pro¬ 
fessional schools, engineers, specialists in the technology of 
manipulation and control (much of the social sciences), would 
probably remain relatively uninvolved. Therefore the long- 
range threat, such as it is, would be to American humanistic and 
scientific culture. I doubt that this would seem important to 
those in decision-making positions. Rusk and Rostow and their 
accomplices in the academic world seem unaware of the serious 
threat that their policies already pose in these spheres. I doubt 
