cant degree, by what the people of the United States will have 
learned from this catastrophe. 

Three times in a generation American technology has laid 
waste a helpless Asian country. In 1945 this was done with a 
sense of moral rectitude that was, and remains, almost unchal¬ 
lenged. In Korea, there were a few qualms. The amazing resist¬ 
ance of the Vietnamese has finally forced us to ask, What have 
we done? There are, at last, some signs of awakening to the 
horrifying reality. Resistance to American violence and to the 
militarization of our own society has become, if not a significant 
force, at least a detectable one. There is hope that the struggle 
against racism and exploitation at home can be linked with the 
struggle to remove the heavy Yankee boot from the necks of 
oppressed people throughout the world. 

Twenty years of intensive cold-war indoctrination and sev¬ 
enty years of myth regarding our international role make it 
difficult to face these issues in a serious way. There is a great 
deal of intellectual debris to be cleared away. Ideological pres¬ 
sures so overpowering that even their existence was denied 
must be examined and understood. The search for alternatives, 


4 



Introduction 


for individuals, for American society, for the international order 
as a whole, has barely begun, and no one can guess where it 
will lead. Quite possibly it will lead nowhere, cut off by domes¬ 
tic repression or its “functional equivalent,” to use a favorite 
term of the present administration: the dominance of a liberal 
technocracy who will serve the existing social order in the belief 
that they represent justice and humanity, fighting limited wars 
at home and overseas to preserve stability, promising that the 
future will be better if only the dispossessed will wait patiently, 
and supported by an apathetic, obedient majority, its mind and 
conscience dulled by a surfeit of commodities and by some new 
version of the old system of beliefs and ideas. Perhaps the worst 
excesses may be eliminated. Perhaps a way may be found to 
bring about a fundamental change in American society of a sort 
that can hardly be envisioned today. A great many people have 
been aroused by the Vietnam tragedy and the domestic crisis. 
There is a new mood of questioning and rebellion among the 
youth of the country, a very healthy and hopeful development, 
by and large, that few would have predicted a decade ago. The 
