constitute a significant proportion of the bombing. 

The political situation remains as before. Elections have been 
held to legitimize the existing regime in American eyes, at least. 
To ensure the proper result, the only avowed “peace candidate,” 
Au Truong Thanh, was ruled off the ballot, as was the candi¬ 
date most likely to be a threat at the polls, General Minh (he 
had previously been barred from the country). “Communists” 
and “neutralists” were excluded by electoral law. In the sena¬ 
torial elections, tickets associated with Tri Quang Buddhists 
were excluded as “proneutralist,” and the trade-union ticket was 
eliminated because “one candidate lacked certification of his 
legal status.” 21 As anticipated, “the candidates are generally an 
aristocratic and urban group,” including few villagers—“about 
90% of them live within Saigon or the surrounding province of 


232 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


Gia Dinh.” 22 The shenanigans involved in deciding who “won” 
the senatorial elections defy description. 23 Although a number 
of American political scientists declared themselves satisfied 
(recalling Dean Rusk’s description of the May 1965 provincial 
elections as “free elections ... by our standards”), the special 
committee of the South Vietnamese Constituent Assembly rec¬ 
ommended to invalidate; the decision was reversed by a vote of 
58-43 in the full Assembly, under police guard, with the director 
of the national police, General Loan, and his armed bodyguards 
conspicuously in the gallery. Phan Khac Suu, the conservative 
landowner who was Assembly Speaker, refused to announce the 
result, saying, “I am absolutely unwilling to accept the ver¬ 
dict.” 24 Shortly after the elections, Truong Dinh Dzu, who sur¬ 
prised everyone by speaking of peace and who placed second in 
the balloting, was arrested. Also arrested was Au Truong 
Thanh, “by 79 armed men in combat gear” led by General 
Loan. 25 Among the charges: he had applied for an exit visa to 
the United States. “It is up to him to explain why he wants to 
go abroad,” stated General Loan. After being held for eighteen 
hours, he was returned to house arrest, where apparently he 
remains, though it is difficult to obtain information. On Novem¬ 
ber 3, the Saigon government freed 6,270 prisoners in an 
amnesty, including 4,320 “Vietcong suspects,” most of them 
peasants, and 1,120 “political detainees”—“persons who have 
been held, usually without trial, for periods up to three years.” 
A ranking official said, “It’s safe to say that only a tiny fraction 
of the total was released Wednesday.” The government refuses 
to give further information. 

Furthermore, it is by now also clear that the government, in 
the months since the elections, has fallen into an almost total 
paralysis, the only noticeable action being the intensive effort 
by the House to block the attempt to draft South Vietnamese 


233 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


boys of eighteen and nineteen to fight the American war. Tran 
Van Do, the Foreign Minister, explains that “we are not able to 
organize South Vietnam politically ... so we cannot accept the 
NLF as a political party . . . the integration of the front will be 
a political way to take over South Vietnam.” 26 The Mekong 
Delta, with 40 percent of the population (and as yet, no North 
Vietnamese soldiers), continues to be a Vietcong stronghold. 
Asked why, President Thieu states: “The main reason the Viet¬ 
cong remain so strongly entrenched in the Mekong Delta is that 
people there still believe there is little difference between the 
French whom they called colonialists, and the Americans whom 
they call imperialists.” 27 Another reason is pointed out by Con¬ 
gressman Reid, who notes that “70 percent of the tenant farm¬ 
ers of the lowlands and Mekong Delta now rent from absentee 
landlords who are living it up in Saigon” 28 —the attempt by 
Congressmen Reid and Moss to have the government release a 
detailed study of land measures in South Vietnam by the Gen¬ 
eral Accounting Office has so far been unsuccessful. 29 

Tran Van Do’s analysis is confirmed by Hanson Baldwin, 
who reports that “almost unanimously, . . . U.S. officials in 
Vietnam view the prospect of imminent negotiations with 
alarm” because inclusion of the NLF in a coalition would be 
“the kiss of death/’ 30 This attitude towards a negotiated settle¬ 
ment reveals itself continually in American diplomacy, with its 
constant posing of new, more extreme conditions whenever an 
opportunity for negotiations arises—as in the Ho Chi Minh- 
Johnson exchange of February 1967, when President Johnson 
proposed, as a condition for negotiations, that we should stop 
“augmenting” our forces in South Vietnam after North Vietnam 
had stopped all infiltration (we, of course, would be free to 
continue our own supply and “infiltration” operations, for our 
own far more extensive expeditionary forces, even after the 
