
Farmers were fleeing from “insurgent-infested areas in a con¬ 
tinuous stream,” though some continued to “sympathize with 
Communism.” However, plans were being laid to “establish con¬ 
fidence” and destroy insurgent forces, to carry out “relief of 
afflicted people,” and, in general, to extend the work of nation 
building. 

I have no knowledge of the reaction in Japan to whatever 
information w T as transmitted to the public about these matters. 
No doubt, many Japanese deplored the excesses of the pacifica¬ 
tion program, though the more reasonable presumably con¬ 
tinued to discuss the situation in balanced and unemotional 
terms, taking note of the violence carried out on both sides. If 
there were vocal advocates of Japanese withdrawal from Man¬ 
churia, they could be shown reports of the sort just quoted, and 
warned of the atrocities that would be sure to follow were 
Japanese troops to be removed and the Communist guerrillas 
given a free hand. Obviously, regardless of cost, the Japanese 
must continue to use limited means to secure law and order and 
200 


The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


to permit the responsible elements of Manchurian society to 
build an independent nation free from externally directed ter¬ 
ror. 

No one hated the necessary violence of pacification more 
than the Japanese officers in charge. Vice-Governor Itagaki de¬ 
scribed the moral dilemma that they faced in moving words: 

The construction of the defense hamlets must be enforced—with 
tears. We issue small subsidy funds and severe orders [to the 
farmers], telling them to move to a designated location by such 
and such a date and that this is the last order. But it is too 
miserable [to watch] the farmers destroying their accustomed 
houses, and [to see] little innocent babies wrapped in rags and 
smiling on carts that are carrying the household goods away. A 
few days ago, a girl of sixteen or seventeen made me weep by 
coming to my office at the prefectural government and kneeling 
down to beg me to spare her house. She said, “Do we really have 
to tear down our house, councilor?’’ She had walked a long way 
to town thinking, “If I asked the councilor, something could be 
done.” Watching the bony back of the little girl who was quietly 
led out by the office boy, I closed my eyes and told myself, “You 
will go to hell.” The hardship of the Japanese police officers at the 
forefront who have to guide the coercive operation directly is be¬ 
yond imagination. I was told many times while I was on my in¬ 
spection tours of the front, “I cannot go on with this kind of 
wretched work. I will quit and go home.” These words, uttered 
[as we sat] around a lamp sipping kaoliang gin, sounded as though 
someone was spitting blood. In each case we had to console and 
keep telling each other that this was the last hill that needed to be 
conquered. The program was forced through mercilessly, inhu¬ 
manely, without emotion—as if driving a horse. As a result, more 
than 100 defense hamlets were constructed throughout the pre¬ 
fecture. These were built with blood, tears, and sweat. 84 

In Manchuria, the problem of the terrorists and Communist 
bandits seems to have been solved by 1940. In China itself, 
pacification continued throughout the Pacific war. Chalmers 
Johnson summarizes these efforts briefly in a recent study. 85 In 

201 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


both north and central China “the Japanese suffered from guer¬ 
rilla attacks and from their inability to distinguish a guerrilla 
from a villager.” In the north the policy implemented was “the 
physical destruction of all life and property in an area where 
guerrillas were thought to exist . . . whereas in central China a 
policy of establishing so-called Model Peace Zones was pursued 
. . . [consisting] of expelling the Communists from certain very 
rich agricultural areas and then, following this military phase, 
of integrating the cleared area into the Japanese satellite econ¬ 
omy.” The latter policy was far more successful, and it was 
possible to place the government in Chinese hands. There was 
also a “strategic hamlet” program, described in the following 
terms in a recent Japanese commentary: 

. . . the Japanese Army tried its “Chinghsiang” (Clean Hamlet) 
operations in Soochow in Central China and its “Ailutsun” 
(Railway Defense Village) program in Shangtung Province in 
North China. . . . The concept of “Chinghsiang” lies in making 
the village or hamlet the basis for reforming government at the 
grass-root level; and, by concentrating all military, political, eco¬ 
nomic and ideological effort on a single village, in building it up 
into a peaceful, stabilized and secure area; then by using this 
village as a model district, in gradually extending security and 
stability to cover the whole “hsien” (county), the whole province 
and eventually the whole country. 86 

However, external interference made it impossible to carry 
through this program. With far greater power to enforce their 
