replied bitterly, “My son and four others went to cut wood. On 
their return an American helicopter hovered over. Frightened, 
they ran. Four were wounded; one was killed .” 6 

In short, urbanization is the process by which you “eliminate 
their source of life (the land and the people), ruin the land and 
concentrate the people into areas you can protect.” This every¬ 
one understands. Yet there is scarcely a ripple of protest when 
the chairman of the department of government at our greatest 

13 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


university speaks of the sociological process of urbanization, the 
benefits it provides for the Vietnamese, and the possibilities it 
offers us to win the war. 

This calm and analytic attitude towards the problem of how 
to win the war can be illustrated with innumerable examples 
from the writings of responsible political analysts. To pick just 
one, consider some remarks by Joseph Harsch on the bombing 
tactics in North Vietnam. 7 Mr. Harsch discusses the frustrations 
of the limited-bombing policy: 

A bomb dropped into a leafy jungle produces no visible result. 
Even if it hits a truck carrying ammunition the pilot seldom has 
the satisfaction of knowing what he achieved. A hit on a big 
hydroelectric dam is another matter. There is a huge explosion 
visible from anywhere above. The dam can be seen to fall. The 
waters can be seen to pour through the breach and drown out 
huge areas of farm land, and villages, in its path. The pilot who 
takes out a hydroelectric dam gets back home with a feeling of 
accomplishment. Novels are written and films are made of such 
exploits. . . . The bomb which takes out the dam will flood 
villages, drown people, destroy crops, and knock out some elec¬ 
tric power. . . . Bombing the dam would hurt people. Every dam 
taken out would give more reason for claiming that “the enemy is 
hurting.” In theory, if he can be “hurt” enough his government 
should be more inclined to go to the conference table. 

Despite all of these advantages of bombing dams, Harsch ap¬ 
parently believes that it is more reasonable to bomb trucks. The 
reason is that “there is no evidence that this causing of pain to 
civilians in North Vietnam” has had the effect of persuading 
