itself to prescribe what shall be the terms and conditions of a 
‘new order’ in areas not under its sovereignty and to constitute 
itself the repository of authority and the agent of destiny in 
regard thereto.” 

In the same vein, Schlesinger’s “middle course” would offer 
the Vietcong the prospect of participating in the future political 
life of Vietnam, “conditioned on their laying down their arms, 
opening up their territories and abiding by the ground rules of 
free elections.” Since there is no compensating demand that the 
Americans withdraw and that the Saigon army lay down their 
arms and open up their territories, Schlesinger’s middle course, 


302 


The Bitter Heritage 


in essential respects, does not even go as far as the position of 
the Pentagon, which, on the surface at least, commits us to 
withdrawal after “Viet Cong military units would be deac¬ 
tivated.” Either proposal requests only that the other side sur¬ 
render, after which we guarantee them political rights. 

A true “middle course,” demanding capitulation of no faction 
in the civil struggle, would advocate withdrawal of all foreign 
troops (American, South Korean, North Vietnamese, and other 
minor contingents), negotiations among existing political forces 
in South Vietnam—that is, the National Liberation Front and 
whatever other forces still have not been crushed by Marshal 
Ky’s American-supported storm troopers—to form a coalition 
government. As is admitted on all sides, adoption of this middle 
course would lead to the collapse of the Saigon regime, a fact 
which, along with the general unwillingness of the Saigon army 
to fight or even remain in uniform, should lead us, as Schles- 
inger puts it, to “wonder all the more about the political side of 
the war.” 

This course has in fact been repeatedly proposed, by the 
NLF, despite Schlesinger’s blanket assertion that “Hanoi and 
the Viet Cong will not negotiate so long as they think they can 
win.” It is possible that the repeated Hanoi and NLF initiatives 
towards negotiation and their demand for a coalition govern¬ 
ment will prove to be a deception, but there is no doubt that it 
is a deception simply to deny the existence of these initiatives or 
to ignore the content of the NLF program—a program which, 
since 1960, has been calling for the formation of “a broad national 
democratic coalition administration . . . including representatives 
