ten its old theories of a “workers’ and peasants’ republic” and a 
“dictatorship of the proletariat.” From its constant repetition of 

113 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


its new slogan of the parliamentary democratic republic it is clear 
that it has lost all sense of reality. When the Catholic and con¬ 
servative sections of the Spanish bourgeoisie saw their old system 
smashed and could find no way out, the Communist Party in¬ 
stilled new hope into them. It assured them that the democratic 
bourgeois republic for which it was pleading put no obstacles in 
the way of Catholic propaganda and, above all, that it stood 
ready to defend the class interests of the bourgeoisie . 120 

That this realization was widespread in the rural areas was 
underscored dramatically by a questionnaire sent by Adelante 
to secretaries of the UGT Federation of Land Workers, pub¬ 
lished in June 1937. 121 The results are summarized as fol¬ 
lows : 

The replies to these questions revealed an astounding unanimity. 
Everywhere the same story. The peasant collectives are today 
most vigorously opposed by the Communist Party. The Commu¬ 
nists organize the well-to-do farmers who are on the lookout for 
cheap labor and are, for this reason, outspokenly hostile to the co¬ 
operative undertakings of the poor peasants. 

It is the element which before the revolution sympathized with 
the Fascists and Monarchists which, according to the testimony 
of the trade-union representatives, is now flocking into the ranks 
of the Communist Party. As to the general effect of Communist 
activity on the country, the secretaries of the U.G.T. had only 
one opinion, which the representative of the Valencia organiza¬ 
tion put in these words: “It is a misfortune in the fullest sense of 
the word .” 122 

It is not difficult to imagine how the recognition of this “mis¬ 
fortune” must have affected the willingness of the land workers 
to take part in the antifascist war, with all the sacrifices that this 
entailed. 

The attitude of the central government to the revolution was 
brutally revealed by its acts and is attested as well in its propa¬ 
ganda. A former minister describes the situation as follows: 


114 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


The fact that is concealed by the coalition of the Spanish Com¬ 
munist Party with the left Republicans and right wing Socialists is 
that there has been a successful social revolution in half of Spain. 
Successful, that is, in the collectivization of factories and farms 
which are operated under trade union control, and operated quite 
efficiently. During the three months that I was director of propa¬ 
ganda for the United States and England under Alvarez del Vayo, 
then Foreign Minister for the Valencia Government, I was in¬ 
structed not to send out one word about this revolution in the 
economic system of loyalist Spain. Nor are any foreign corre¬ 
spondents in Valencia permitted to write freely of the revolution 
that has taken place . 123 

In short, there is much reason to believe that the will to fight 
Franco was significantly diminished, perhaps destroyed, by the 
policy of authoritarian centralization undertaken by the liberal- 
Communist coalition, carried through by force, and disguised in 
the propaganda that was disseminated among Western intel¬ 
lectuals 124 and that still dominates the writing of history. To 
the extent that this is a correct judgment, the alternative pro¬ 
posed by Berneri and the left “extremists” gains in plausi¬ 
bility. 

As noted earlier, Caballero and the anarchist ministers ac¬ 
cepted the policy of counterrevolution because of their trust in 
the Western democracies, which they felt sure would sooner or 
later come to their aid. This feeling was perhaps understanda¬ 
ble in 1937. It is strange, however, that a historian writing in 
the 1960s should dismiss the proposal to strike at Franco’s rear 
by extending the revolutionary war to Morocco, on grounds 
that this would have displeased Western capitalism (see page 
110 above). 

Berneri was quite right in his belief that the Western democ¬ 
racies would not take part in an antifascist struggle in Spain. In 
fact, their complicity in the fascist insurrection was not slight. 


115 


*= AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 
