continues, the United States is not certain that all of these are volun¬ 
tary adherents. This is not the first such demonstration of Communist 
duplicity. Another example was seen in the year 1962, when according 
to United States government sources 15,000 guerrillas suffered 30.000 
casualties. See Arthur Schlesinger, A Thousand Days, p. 982. 

26. Reprinted in a collection of essays entitled The End of Ideology: 
On the Exhaustion of Political Ideas in the Fifties (New York, The 
Free Press, 1960), pp. 369-75. I have no intention here of entering into 
the full range of issues that have been raised in the discussion of the 
“end of ideology” for the past dozen years. It is difficult to see how a 
rational person could quarrel with many of the theses that have been 
put forth, e.g., that at a certain historical moment the “politics of 
civility” is appropriate, and perhaps efficacious; that one who advo¬ 
cates action (or inaction—a matter less frequently noted) has a re¬ 
sponsibility to assess its social cost; that dogmatic fanaticism and 
“secular religions” should be combated (or if possible ignored); that 
technical solutions to problems should be implemented, where possi¬ 
ble; that “le dogmatisme ideologique devait disparaitre pour que les 
idees reprissent vie” (Aron); and so on. Since this is sometimes taken to 
be an expression of an “anti-Marxist” position, it is worth keeping in 
mind that such sentiments as these have no bearing on non-Bolshevik 
Marxism, as represented, for example, by such figures as Luxemburg, 
Pannekoek, Korsch, Arthur Rosenberg, and many others. 

27. Rostow and Hatch, op. cit., p. 10. 

28. The extent to which this “technology” is value-free is hardly very 
important, given the clear commitments of those who apply it. The 
problems with which research is concerned are those posed by the 
Pentagon or the great corporations, not, say, by the revolutionaries of 

363 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


northeast Brazil or by SNCC. Nor am I aware of a research project 
devoted to the problem of how poorly armed guerrillas might more 
effectively resist a brutal and devastating military technology—surely 
the kind of problem that would have interested the free-floating intel¬ 
lectual who is now hopelessly out of date. 

29. In view of the unremitting propaganda barrage on “Chinese 
expansionism/’ perhaps a word of comment is in order. Typical of 
American propaganda on this subject is Adlai Stevenson’s assessment, 
shortly before his death (cf. New York Times Magazine, March 13, 
1966): “So far, the new Communist ‘dynasty’ has been very aggres¬ 
sive. Tibet was swallowed, India attacked, the Malays had to fight 12 
years to resist a ‘national liberation’ they could receive from the Brit¬ 
ish by a more peaceful route. Today, the apparatus of infiltration and 
aggression is already at work in North Thailand.” 

As to Malaya, Stevenson is probably confusing ethnic Chinese with 
the government of China. Those concerned with the actual events 
would agree with Harry Miller, in Communist Menace in Malaya 
(New York, Frederick A. Praeger, Inc., 1954), p. 230, that “Com¬ 
munist China continues to show little interest in the Malayan affair 
beyond its usual fulminations via Peking Radio.” There are various 
harsh things that one might say about Chinese behavior in w T hat the 
Sino-Indian Treaty of 1954 refers to as “the Tibet region of China,” 
but it is no more proof of a tendency towards expansionism than is the 
behavior of the Indian government with regard to the Naga and Mizo 
tribesmen. As to North Thailand, “the apparatus of infiltration” may 
well be at work, though there is little reason to suppose it to be 
Chinese—and it is surely not unrelated to the American use of 
Thailand as a base for its attack on Vietnam. This reference is the 
sheerest hypocrisy. 

The “attack on India” grew out of a border dispute that began 
several years after the Chinese had completed a road from Tibet to 
Sinkiang in an area so remote from Indian control that the Indians 
learned about this operation only from the Chinese press. According 
to American Air Force maps, the disputed area is in Chinese territory. 
Cf. Alastair Lamb, China Quarterly, No. 23 (July-September 1965), pp. 
202-7. To this distinguished authority, “it seems unlikely that the 
Chinese have been working out some master plan ... to take over the 
Indian sub-continent lock, stock and overpopulated barrel.” Rather, he 
thinks it likely that the Chinese were probably unaware that India even 
364 


The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


claimed the territory through which the road passed. After the Chinese 
military victory, Chinese troops were, in most areas, withdrawn be¬ 
yond the McMahon Line, a border which the British had attempted to 
impose on China in 1914 but which has never been recognized by 
China (Nationalist or Communist), the United States, or any other 
government. 

It is remarkable that a person in a responsible position could describe 
all of this as Chinese expansionism. In fact, it is absurd to debate the 
hypothetical aggressiveness of a China surrounded by American mis¬ 
siles and a still expanding network of military bases backed by an 
enormous American expeditionary force in Southeast Asia. It is con¬ 
