Among the businesses that remained “ethically honest” and 
therefore did not incur Roosevelt's wrath was the Texaco Oil 
Company, which violated its contracts with the Spanish Repub¬ 
lic and shipped oil instead to Franco. (Five tankers that were 
on the high seas in July 1936 were diverted to Franco, who 
received six million dollars worth of oil on credit during the 


121 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


Civil War.) Apparently, neither the press nor the American 
government was able to discover this fact, though it was re¬ 
ported in left-wing journals at the time. 140 There is evidence 
that the American government shared the fears of Churchill 
and others about the dangerous forces on the Republican side. 
Secretary of State Cordell Hull, for example, informed Roose¬ 
velt on July 23, 1936, that “one of the most serious factors in this 
situation lies in the fact that the [Spanish] Government has 
distributed large quantities of arms and ammunition into the 
hands of irresponsible members of left-wing political organiza¬ 
tions.” 141 

Like Churchill, many responsible Americans began to rethink 
their attitude towards the Republic after the social revolution 
had been crushed. 142 However, relations with Franco con¬ 
tinued cordial. In 1957, President Eisenhower congratulated 
Franco on the “happy anniversary” of his rebellion, 143 and Sec¬ 
retary Rusk added his tribute in 1961. Upon criticism, Rusk was 
defended by the American ambassador to Madrid, who ob¬ 
served that Spain is “a nation which understands the implacable 
nature of the communist threat,” 144 like Thailand, South 
Korea, Taiwan, and selected other countries of the Free 
World. 145 

In the light of such facts as these, it seems to me that Jackson 
is not treating the historical record seriously when he dismisses 
the proposals of the Spanish left as absurd. Quite possibly 
Berneri’s strategy would have failed, as did that of the liberal- 
Communist coalition that took over the Republic. It was far 
from senseless, however. I think that the failure of historians to 
consider it more seriously follows, once again, from the elitist 
bias that dominates the writing of history—and, in this case, 
from a certain sentimentality about the Western democracies. 


122 
