outside of the State Department, that “the historical fact is that force 
in the struggle for the South was first used by the Diem regime, not by 
the Communists,” that the latter was, moreover, far more restrained, 
that although “guidance and assistance from the North” may have 
been an important factor in the “amazing success” of the NLF, “it 
would have made little headway without wide popular support,” and 
that “the war started as a civil war in the South,” well before the 
alleged infiltration began (Joseph Buttinger, Vietnam: A Dragon Em¬ 
battled [New York, Frederick A. Praeger, Inc. 1967], Vol. 2, pp. 976 
f., 981-82). Buttinger’s study is quite interesting, not only for its 
careful and extensive scholarship but also because he was, for many 
years, a strong supporter of the Diem regime and the American in¬ 
volvement in support of it. He explains, for example, why Diem was 
unable to move towards democratic, representative structures: “Local 
elections would have given the Vietminh control of most of the rural 
communities. The Vietminh was not only popular and in effective 
political control of large regions, but it alone had people with the 
requisite organizational skills to exploit whatever opportunities for 
democratic self-expression the regime opened up.” Thus, “Freely con¬ 
stituted organizations too would have been captured by the Vietminh” 
(p. 856); he adds that “the NLF was truly the Vietminh reborn” and 
speaks of “the similarity, or better, near identity, of the Vietminh and 
the NLF.” He also analyzes the much greater economic progress in 
the North (cf. pp. 928, 966 f.), and notes that repression of dissidence 
in the North was less severe than in the South, largely, he feels, 
because dissidence was less dangerous (cf. pp. 964 f.). 

50. The thrust of “much of the American effort in Vietnam,” according to 
Scigliano, who served in the Michigan State University Advisory 
Group in Vietnam (op. cit., 1963, p. 197). In contrast, “precious little of 
American energies or resources has been devoted to political goals, as 
contrasted with the military and economic aims.” His detailed breakdown 
of aid figures shows that military aid was overwhelmingly dominant, even 

283 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


in “economic and social development/’ and that even true economic aid 
was largely directed to the relatively affluent. See pp. 135 f. for a 
summary. 

51. Saville Davis, Christian Science Monitor, October 21, 1967. 

52. “Not a Dove, But No Longer a Hawk,” New York Times Maga¬ 
zine, October 9, 1966. 

53. As to the military, Jonathan Randal points out in the New York 
