munist behavior”; and “the Viet-Cong inherited, after Geneva, 
much of the popular support and sympathies previously at¬ 
tached to the Viet-Minh in the South.” After the fall of Diem, 
matters became still worse: “. . . vast regions that had been 
under government control quickly came under the influence of 
the Viet-Cong.” By late 1964 the pacification of Quang Nam 
Province had become “all but impossible,” and the worst of it is 
that “the battle for Quang Nam was lost by the government to 
Viet-Cong forces recruited for the most part from within the 
province.” 22 By 1966, the Vietcong seem so well entrenched in 
rural areas that “only a highly imaginative and comprehensive 
counterinsurgency campaign, with nearly perfect execution and 
substantial military support, would be capable of dislodging 
38 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


such a powerful and extensive insurgent apparatus.” 

A major difficulty we face is the “progressive social and 
economic results” shown by the Vietcong efforts. An AID report 
in March 1965 explains the problem. Comparing “our ‘new life 
hamlets’ ” to the Vietcong hamlets, the report comments as fol¬ 
lows: 

The basic differences are that the VC hamlets are well organized, 
clean, economically self supporting and have an active defense 
system. For example, a cottage industry in one hamlet was as 
large as has been previously witnessed anywhere in Chuong Thien 
province. New canals are being dug and pineapples are under 
cultivation. The VC also have a relocation program for younger 
families. These areas coincide with the areas just outside the planned 
GVN sphere of interest. Unless the USOM/GVN activities exhibit a 
more qualitative basis [sic], there is little likelihood of changing the 
present attitudes of the people. For example, in one area only five 
kilometers from the province capital, the people refused medical 
assistance offered by ARVN medics. 

However, all is not lost. Even though “the Viet-Cong strength 
in the countryside has made a ‘quantum leap’ from its position 
of early 1962,” there is a compensating factor, namely, “the 
counterinsurgent military capability was revolutionized by sub¬ 
stantial American troop inputs.” This allows us entirely new 
options. For example, we can implement more effectively some 
of the “experiments with population and resources control 
methods” that were tried by the USOM and the National Police 
as early as 1961, though with little success. Given the new possi¬ 
bilities for “material and human resources control,” we may 
even recapture some of the population—a serious matter: 
“Given the enormous numbers of South Vietnamese citizens 
presently allied with the Viet-Cong (for whatever reason), the 
recovery of these peasants for the national cause must be made 
one of the central tasks of the pacification enterprise.” 


39 


- AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

If we are going to succeed in implementing “material and 
human resources control,” we must moderate ARVN behavior 
somehow. Thus, according to an AID report of February 1965, 
“A high incident rate of stealing, robbing, raping and obtain¬ 
ing free meals in the rural areas has not endeared the popula¬ 
tion towards ARVN or Regional Forces.” Nor did it improve 
matters when many civilians witnessed a case in which an 
ARVN company leader killed a draft dodger, disemboweled him, 
“took his heart and liver out and had them cooked at a restau¬ 
rant,” after which “the heart and liver were eaten by a number 
of soldiers.” Such acts cause great difficulties, especially in try¬ 
ing to combat an enemy so vile as to practice “exemplary 
Communist behavior.” 

More generally, “the success of pacification requires that 
there be survivors to be pacified,” and given “the sheer magni¬ 
tude of American, Korean, Australian and indigenous Viet¬ 
namese forces,” which has so severely “strained the economic and 
social equilibrium of the nation,” it is sometimes difficult to 
ensure this minimal condition. 

There are other problems, for example, “the difficulty of 
denying food to the enemy” in the Mekong Delta; “the hunger 
for land ownership,” which, for some curious reason, is never 
satisfied by our friends in Saigon; the corruption; occasional 
bombing of the “wrong” village; the pervasive “Viet-Cong in¬ 
filtration of military and civilian government organization”; the 
fact that when we relocate peasants to new hamlets, we often 
leave “the fox still in the henhouse,” because of inadequate 
police methods; and so on. 

Still, we have a good “pacification theory,” which involves 
three steps: “elimination of the Viet-Cong by search-and-de- 
stroy operations, protection and control of the population and 
its resources by police and military forces, and preparing and 


40 
