torians often reveal a strong distaste for “the forces of a popular 
movement” and “the spirit of the militia.” And an argument can 
be given that they correspondingly fail to comprehend the “po¬ 
litical factor.” 

In the May Days of 1937, the revolution in Catalonia re¬ 
ceived the final blow. On May 3, the councilor for public order, 
PSUC member Rodriguez Salas, appeared at the central tele¬ 
phone building with a detachment of police, without prior 
warning or consultation with the anarchist ministers in the 
government, to take over the telephone exchange. The ex- 


99 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


change, formerly the property of IT&T, had been captured by 
Barcelona workers in July and had since functioned under the 
control of a UGT-CNT committee, with a governmental dele¬ 
gate, quite in accord with the collectivization decree of October 
24, 1936. According to the London Daily Worker (May 11, 
1937), “Salas sent the armed republican police to disarm the 
employees there, most of them members of the CNT unions.” 
The motive, according to Juan Comorera, was “to put a stop to 
an abnormal situation,” namely, that no one could speak over 
the telephone “without the indiscreet ear of the controller 
knowing it.” 93 Armed resistance in the telephone building pre¬ 
vented its occupation. Local defense committees erected barri¬ 
cades throughout Barcelona. Companys and the anarchist leaders 
pleaded with the workers to disarm. An uneasy truce con¬ 
tinued until May 6, when the first detachments of Assault 
Guards arrived, violating the promises of the government that 
the truce would be observed and military forces withdrawn. 
The troops were under the command of General Pozas, for¬ 
merly commander of the hated Civil Guard and now a member 
of the "Communist party. In the fighting that followed, there 
were some five hundred killed and over a thousand wounded. 
“The May Days in reality sounded the death-knell of the revo¬ 
lution, announcing political defeat for all and death for certain 
of the revolutionary leaders.” 94 

These events—of enormous significance in the history of the 
Spanish revolution—Jackson sketches in bare outline as a mar¬ 
ginal incident. Obviously the historian's account must be selec¬ 
tive ; from the left-liberal point of view that Jackson shares with 
Hugh Thomas and many others, the liquidation of the revolu¬ 
tion in Catalonia was a minor event, as the revolution itself was 
merely a kind of irrelevant nuisance, a minor irritant diverting 
energy from the struggle to save the bourgeois government. 


100 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


The decision to crush the revolution by force is described as 
follows: 

On May 5, Companys obtained a fragile truce, on the basis of 
which the PSUC councilors were to retire from the regional 
government, and the question of the Telephone Company was left 
to future negotiation. That very night, however, Antonio Sese, a 
UGT official who was about to enter the reorganized cabinet, was 
murdered. In any event, the Valencia authorities were in no 
mood to temporize further with the Catalan Left. On May 6 
several thousand asaltos arrived in the city, and the Republican 
Navy demonstrated in the port. 95 

What is interesting about this description is what is left un¬ 
said. For example, there is no comment on the fact that the 
dispatch of the asaltos violated the “fragile truce” that had been 
accepted by the Barcelona workers and the anarchist and the 
POUM troops nearby, and barely a mention of the bloody con¬ 
sequences or the political meaning of this unwillingness “to 
temporize further with the Catalan Left.” There is no mention 
of the fact that along with Sese, Berneri and other anarchist 
leaders were murdered, not only during the May Days but in 
the weeks preceding . 90 Jackson does not refer to the fact that 
along with the Republican navy, British ships also “demon¬ 
strated” in the port . 97 Nor does he refer to Orwell’s telling 
observations about the Assault Guards, as compared to the 
troops at the front, where he had spent the preceding months. 
The Assault Guards “were splendid troops, much the best I had 
seen in Spain. ... I was used to the ragged, scarcely-armed 
militia on the Aragon front, and I had not known that the 
Republic possessed troops like these. . . . The Civil Guards and 
Carabineros, who were not intended for the front at all, were 
better armed and far better clad than ourselves. I suspect it is 
the same in all wars—always the same contrast between the 


101 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 
