tice is entirely without worth. The matter is simply put in a 
recent study of postwar American foreign policy, which is very 
critical of its recent directions: . . the American empire came 
into being by accident and has been maintained from a sense of 
benevolence.” . . . “We engaged in a kind of welfare imperial¬ 
ism, empire-building for noble ends rather than for such base 
motives as profit and influence.” . . . “We have not exploited our 
empire.” “. . . have we not been generous with our clients and 
allies, sending them vast amounts of money and even sacrificing 
the lives of our own soldiers on their behalf? Of course we 
have .” 99 

In comparison with this long-standing record of benevolence, 
Japanese aggression stands exposed as the kind of “unprece¬ 
dented evil” that fully merited the atom bomb. 

This review obviously does not exhaust the issues. But it does 
serve, I think, to place in context the policy alternatives that 
were open to the United States in 1941 and in earlier years. The 
predominant American opinion remains that the only proper 
response was the one that was adopted. In contrast, “realists” of 
the Grew-Kennan variety take the position expressed by 
Schroeder, who argues against the mistake of basing policy on 
an “emphasis on meting out justice rather than doing good.” 


207 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


The “moralistic” position of Hull, the “too hard and rigid policy 
with Japan,” in Schroeder’s view, was not based on “sinister 
design or warlike intent, but on a sincere and uncompromising 
adherence to moral principles and liberal doctrines.” The “real¬ 
istic” approach of accommodation favored by Grew would not 
have been immoral, he argues. “It would have constituted only 
a recognition that the American government was not then in a 
position to enforce its principles, reserving for America full 
freedom of action at some later, more favorable time .” 100 
Schroeder does not question that we were, in fact, “meting out 
justice,” but argues only that we were wrong, overly moralistic, 
to do so; he does not question the principles to which the 
United States adhered, but only our insistence on abiding by 
these principles at an inappropriate time. 

In contrast to the alternatives of “realism” and “moralism,” so 
defined, the revolutionary pacifism of Muste seems to me both 
eminently realistic and highly moral. Furthermore, even if we 
were to grant the claim that the United States simply acted in 
legitimate self-defense, subsequent events in Asia have amply, 
hideously, confirmed Muste’s basic premise that “the means one 
uses inevitably incorporate themselves into his ends and, if evil, 
will defeat him.” Whether Muste’s w r as in fact the most realistic 
and moral position at the time may be debated, but I think 
there is no doubt that its remoteness from the American con¬ 
sciousness was a great tragedy. The lack of a radical critique of 
the sort that Muste, and a few others, sought to develop was 
one of the factors that contributed to the atrocity of Hiroshima 
and Nagasaki, as the weakness and ineffectiveness of such radi¬ 
cal critique today will doubtless lead to new and unimaginable 
horrors. 


208 


The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


Notes 

1. “Pacifism and Class War,” in The Essays of A. J. Muste, ed. Nat 
Hentoff (Indianapolis, The Bobbs-Merrill Co., Inc., 1967), pp. 179- 
85. 

2. Daniel Bell, in “Ideology—A Debate,” Commentary, Vol. 38 (Oc¬ 
tober 1964), p. 72. 

3. “The Movement To Stop the War in Vietnam,” Essays, pp. 503- 
13. 

4. Essays, pp. 180, 287. 

5. Congressional Record, May 9, 1967. 

6. The probabilities are meaningless with respect to the objective situ¬ 
ation, but not with respect to the mentalities of those who use them as 
a guide to action. If anything can be more frightening than the behav¬ 
ior of the self-styled “pragmatic” and “tough-minded” policy makers 
of the Kennedy administration in this crisis, it is the attitude that 
remains, long after the crisis has cooled, that this was Kennedy's 
“finest hour,” in which he demonstrated his skill at the game of 
“nuclear chicken” (cf. historian Thomas Bailey, New York Times 
Magazine, November 6, 1965). 

7. “Where Are We Going?” Essays, pp. 234-60. 
