extended by the government in power,” obviously. Hilsman ex¬ 
presses the liberal view succinctly in the distinction he draws 
between the Iranian subversion and the blundering attempt at 
the Bay of Pigs: “It is one thing ... to help the Shah’s support¬ 
ers in Iran in their struggle against Mossadegh and his Com¬ 
munist allies, but it is something else again to sponsor a thou¬ 
sand-man invasion against Castro’s Cuba, where there was no 
effective internal opposition.” The former effort was admirable; 
the latter, bound to fail, “is something else again” from the 
point of view of pragmatic liberalism. 

In Vietnam liberal interventionism was not properly con¬ 
ducted, and the situation got out of hand. We learn more about 
the character of this approach to international affairs by study¬ 
ing a more successful instance. Thailand is a case in point, and 
a useful perspective on liberal American ideology is given by 
the careful and informative work of Frank C. Darling, a Ken¬ 
nedy liberal who was a CIA analyst for Southeast Asia and is 
now chairman of the political science department at DePauw 
University. 40 

The facts relevant to this discussion, as Darling outlines 
them, are briefly as follows. At the end of World War II the 
former British minister, Sir Josiah Crosby, warned that unless 
the power of the Thai armed forces was reduced, “the estab¬ 
lishment of a constitutional government would be doomed and 
the return of a military dictatorship would be inevitable.” 
American policy in the postwar period was to support and 


61 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


strengthen the armed forces and the police, and Crosby’s pre¬ 
diction was borne out. 

There were incipient steps towards constitutional government 
in the immediate postwar period. However, a series of military 
coups established Phibun Songkhram, who had collaborated 
with the Japanese during the war, as premier in 1948, aborting 
these early efforts. The American reaction to the liberal gov¬ 
ernments had been ambiguous and “temporizing.” In contrast, 
Phibun was immediately recognized by the United States. 
Why? “Within this increasingly turbulent region Thailand was 
