protect a ruling elite from internal insurgency. 35 

Perhaps the most interesting aspect of scholarly work such as 
this is the way in which behavioral-science rhetoric is used to 
lend a vague aura of respectability. One might construct some 
such chain of associations as this. Science, as everyone knows, is 
responsible, moderate, unsentimental, and otherwise good. Be¬ 
havioral science tells us that we can be concerned only with 
behavior and control of behavior. Therefore we should be con¬ 
cerned only with behavior and control of behavior ; 36 and it is 
responsible, moderate, unsentimental, and otherwise good to 
control behavior by appropriately applied reward and punish- 


★ - 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


ment. Concern for loyalties and attitudes is emotional and un¬ 
scientific. As rational men, believers in the scientific ethic, 
we should be concerned with manipulating behavior in a desir¬ 
able direction, and not be deluded by mystical notions of 
freedom, individual needs, or popular will. 

Let me make it clear that I am not criticizing the behavioral 
sciences because they lend themselves to such perversion. On 
other grounds, the “behavioral persuasion” seems to me to lack 
merit; it seriously mistakes the method of science and imposes 
pointless methodological strictures on the study of man and 
society, but this is another matter entirely. It is, however, fair to 
inquire to what extent the popularity of this approach is based 
on its demonstrated achievements, and to what extent its appeal 
is based on the ease with which it can be refashioned as a new 
coercive ideology with a faintly scientific tone. (In passing, I 
think it is worth mention that the same questions can be raised 
outside of politics, specifically, in connection with education 
and therapy.) 

The assumption that the colonial power is benevolent and has 
the interests of the natives at heart is as old as imperialism 
itself. Thus the liberal Herman Merivale, lecturing at Oxford in 
1840, lauded the “British policy of colonial enlightenment” 
which “stands in contrast to that of our ancestors,” who cared 
little “about the internal government of their colonies, and kept 
them in subjection in order to derive certain supposed commer¬ 
cial advantages from them,” whereas we “give them commercial 
advantages, and tax ourselves for their benefit, in order to give 
them an interest in remaining under our supremacy, that we 
may have the pleasure of governing them.” 37 And our own 
John Hay in 1898 outlined “a partnership in beneficence” which 
would bring freedom and civilization to Cuba, Hawaii, and the 
Philippines, just as the Pax Britannica had brought these bene- 


58 



Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


fits to India, Egypt, and South Africa. 38 But although the 
benevolence of imperialism is a familiar refrain, the idea that 
the issue of benevolence is irrelevant, an improper, sentimental 
consideration, is something of an innovation in imperialist 
rhetoric, a contribution of the sort one might perhaps expect 
from “the new mandarins” whose claim to power is based on 
knowledge and technique. 

Going a step beyond, notice how perverse is the entire dis¬ 
cussion of the “conceptual framework” for counterinsurgency. 
The idea that we must choose between the method of “winning 
hearts and minds” and the method of shaping behavior pre¬ 
sumes that we have the right to choose at all. This is to grant us 
a right that we would surely accord to no other world power. 
Yet the overwhelming body of American scholarship accords us 
this right. For example, William Henderson, formerly associate 
executive director and Far Eastern specialist for the Council on 
Foreign Relations, proposes that we must “prosecute a construc¬ 
tive, manipulative diplomacy” in order to deal with “internal 
subversion, particularly in the form of Communist-instigated 
guerrilla warfare or insurgency”—“internal aggression,” as he 
calls it, in accordance with contemporary usage. 39 Our “historic 
tasks,” he proclaims, are “nothing less than to assist purpose¬ 
fully and constructively in the processes of modern nation 
building in Southeast Asia, to deflect the course of a funda¬ 
mental revolution into channels compatible with the long range 
interests of the United States.” It is understood that true “nation 
building” is that path of development compatible with our in¬ 
terests; hence there is no difficulty in pursuing these historic 
tasks in concert. There are, however, two real stumbling-blocks 
in the way of the required manipulative diplomacy. The first is 
“a great psychological barrier.” We must learn to abandon “old 
dogma” and pursue a “new diplomacy” that is “frankly inter- 


59 

