It had no formal structure and held no conventions or 
assemblies.” As to the Dai Viet, “Dai Viet membership included 
leading Vietnamese figures and governmental officials who 
viewed Japan as a suitable model for Vietnam [N. B. fascist 
Japan].The organization never made any particular obeisance 
either to democracy or to the rank-and-file Vietnamese.It prob¬ 
ably never numbered more than 1,000 members and did not 
consider itself a mass-based organization.It turned away from 


46 




Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


Western liberalism, although its economic orientation was basi¬ 
cally socialist, in favor of authoritarianism and blind obedi¬ 
ence.” During World War II, “it was at all times strongly pro- 
Japanese.” 

In contrast to these genuine nationalists, we have the Viet- 
minh, whose “war was anticolonial, clearly nationalistic, and 
concerned all Vietnamese,” and the NLF, which regarded the 
rural Vietnamese not “simply as a pawn in a power struggle but 
as the active element in the thrust,” which “maintained that its 
contest with the GVN and the United States should be fought 
out at a political level and that the use of massed military might 
was in itself illegitimate,” until forced by the Americans and the 
GVN “to use counterforce to survive.” In its internal documents 
as well as its public pronouncements the NLF insisted, from its 
earliest days, that its goal must be to “set up a democratic 
national coalition administration in South Vietnam; realize in¬ 
dependence, democratic freedoms, and improvement of the 
people’s living conditions; safeguard peace; and achieve na¬ 
tional reunification on the basis of independence and democ¬ 
racy.” “Aside from the NLF there has never been a truly mass- 
based political party in South Vietnam.” It organized “the rural 
population through the instrument of self-control—victory by 
means of the organizational weapon,” setting up a variety of 
self-help “functional liberation associations” based on “associa- 
tional discipline” coupled with “the right of freedom of discus¬ 
sion and secret vote at association meetings,” and generating 
“a sense of community, first, by developing a pattern of political 
thought and behavior appropriate to the social problems of the 
rural Vietnamese village in the midst of sharp social change 
and, second, by providing a basis for group action that allowed 
the individual villager to see that his own efforts could have 
meaning and effect” (obviously, a skilled and treacherous 


47 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


enemy).This was, of course, prior to “the advent of massive 
American aid, and the GVN’s strategic hamlet program.” With 
the American takeover of the war, the emphasis shifted to mili¬ 
tary rather than political action, and ultimately, North Viet¬ 
namese involvement and perhaps control; “beginning in 1965, 
large numbers of regular army troops from North Vietnam were 
sent into South Vietnam.” 

In short, w T hat we see is a contrast between the Dai Viet and 
VNQDD, representing South Vietnamese nationalism, and the 
NLF, an extrinsic alien force.