that they appreciate the extent, or the importance, of the dissi¬ 
pation of creative energies and the growing disaffection among 
young people who are sickened by the violence and deceit that 
they see in the exercise of American power. Further disruption 
in these areas might, then, seem to them a negligible cost. 

Resistance is in part a moral responsibility, in part a tactic to 
affect government policy. In particular, with respect to support 
for draft resistance, I feel that it is a moral responsibility that 
cannot be shirked. On the other hand, as a tactic, it seems to me 
of doubtful effectiveness, as matters now stand. I say this with 
diffidence and considerable uncertainty. 

Whatever happens in Vietnam, there are bound to be signifi¬ 
cant domestic repercussions. It is axiomatic that no army ever 
loses a war; its brave soldiers and all-knowing generals are 
stabbed in the back by treacherous civilians. American with¬ 
drawal is likely, then, to bring to the surface the worst features 
of American culture, and perhaps to lead to a serious internal 
repression. On the other hand, an American “victory” might 
well have dangerous consequences both at home and abroad. It 
might give added prestige to an already far too powerful execu¬ 
tive. There is, moreover, the problem emphasized by A. J. 


384 


On Resistance 


Muste: . . the problem after a war is with the victor. He 
thinks he has just proved that war and violence pay. Who will 
now teach him a lesson?” For the most powerful and most 
aggressive nation in the world, this is indeed a danger. If we 
can rid ourselves of the naive belief that we are somehow 
different and more pure—a belief held by the British, the 
French, the Japanese, in their moments of imperial glory—then 
we will be able honestly to face the truth in this observation. 
One can only hope that we will face this truth before too many 
innocents, on all sides, suffer and die. 

Finally, there are certain principles that I think must be 
stressed as we try to build effective opposition to this and future 
wars. We must not, I believe, thoughtlessly urge others to com¬ 
mit civil disobedience, and we must be careful not to construct 
situations in which young people will find themselves induced, 
perhaps in violation of their basic convictions, to commit civil 
disobedience. Resistance must be freely undertaken. I also 
hope, more sincerely than I know how to say, that it will create 
bonds of friendship and mutual trust that will support and 
strengthen those who are sure to suffer. 


385 


























Following the publication of “On Resistance” in the New York 
Review of Books, a number of very interesting letters were 
received dealing with several of the questions raised in it. Two 
appeared, with accompanying comments of mine, in the issue 
of February 1, 1968. The first, from a college professor whom I 
will identify here simply as Mr. Y, noted “an undramatic but 
steady shift of opinion” among middle-class people, many con¬ 
servative or apolitical, who “are deciding that the war simply 
isn't worth what it costs.” Mr. Y counsels that these people can 
be convinced, not that the war is wrong, but that it is “damned 
foolishness,” and he suggests that “the patient effort to win over 
those millions who view the war in pragmatic rather than moral 
terms may be more significant” than the various forms of resist¬ 
ance which, while perhaps revealing a “pure conscience,” may 
nevertheless “not actually help put an end to war.” The second 
letter is from a former member of “The Resistance,” now under¬ 
ground and obviously unidentified, who signs simply: William 


