
AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


the insurgents who menaced the people and obstructed the at¬ 
tainment of wangtao [the perfect w r ay of the ancient kings, or the 
kingly way] had at one point reached 300.000. but the earnest 
and brave efforts of various subjugating agencies headed by the 
Japanese army brought about great results. Thus the number of 
insurgents declined from 120,000 in 1933, to 50.000 in 1934; 
40,000 in 1935; 30,000 in 1936; and 20.000 in 1937. As of 
September, 1938, the number of insurgents is estimated at 10.000. 78 

The success was achieved in part by contingents of Japanese 
troops, in part by the national army of Manchukuo, and in part 
by the police. “Because of the success of these activities [which 
led to the winning of the support of the masses], the insurgent 
groups are now in an extremely precarious condition and the 
attainment of peace seems to be in sight.” The “native bandits” 
and “rebellious troops from the local armies” had been ab¬ 
sorbed by the Chinese Communist party during this period, and 
were, by 1938, “under the Communist hegemony operating 
with the slogan of ‘Oppose Manchukuo and Resist Japan,’ ” 
with political leadership supplied from China. The goal of the 
insurgents was “to destroy the government’s pacification efforts” 
and to win public confidence and disturb public opinion “by 
opposing Manchukuo and Japan and espousing Communism. 
Their efforts lead the masses astray on various matters and 
significantly hamper the development of natural resources and 
the improvement of the people’s livelihood.” Through a combi¬ 
nation of pacification and propaganda activities, their efforts 
were being countered and, the report continues, the “nation’s 
economy and culture” preserved. 

The report emphasizes the strong distaste of the authorities 
for forceful means: 

The use of military force against the insurgents is the principal 
means of attaining peace and order, in that it will directly reduce 
the number of insurgents. But this method is to be used only as a 

196 


The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


last resort; it is not a method that is compatible with our nation’s 
philosophy, which is the realization of the kingly way ( wangtao ). 
The most appropriate means suitable for a righteous government 
is that of liberating the masses from old notions implanted by a 
long period of exploitative rule by military cliques and feudalistic 
habits and of dispelling the illusions created by Communist ideol¬ 
ogy. Furthermore, the philosophy of the state calls for a proper 
understanding by the masses of the true nature of righteous gov¬ 
ernment, the reasons behind the establishment of the state, and 
the current state of affairs. The insurgents should be given an 
opportunity to alter their misconceived notions and to become 
good citizens. This is why the operation for the inducement of 
surrender has such grave significance. 

A continuing problem was the “nearly universal phenomenon in 
Manchuria that the insurgent groups return to their original 
state of operation as soon as the subjugation period is termi¬ 
nated and troops are withdrawn.” 79 To counter this tendency, a 
number of methods were used, with considerable success. 
Communist groups were heavily infiltrated and alienation was 
created within the guerrilla groups. The formerly anti-Japanese 
Korean community was won over by “sociopolitical and accom¬ 
panying psychological changes” (“revolutionary development,” 
in modern phraseology), specifically, by offering them “the pos¬ 
sibility of owning land and escaping from the control of their 
Chinese landlords” (Lee, p. 23). Among the Chinese, the situa¬ 
tion was different, and more difficult. 

Through propaganda and example, the guerrillas awakened the 
patriotism of the people and convinced them that the guerrillas 
were the only true defenders of their interests. When necessary, 
the guerrillas terrorized the reluctant elements as a warning to 
others. An intricate network of anti-Japanese societies, peasant 
societies, and the like provided the guerrillas both with the neces¬ 
sary supplies and with vital intelligence. Farmers who were 
located in regions too remote to be protected by the Manchukuo 
authorities and the Japanese were forced to comply with the 

197 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


guerrillas’ demands, even if they had no desire to assist the in¬ 
surgent cause. [Lee, p. 25] 

The obvious answer to this problem was a system of “col¬ 
lective hamlets.” By the end of 1937, the Police Affairs Head¬ 
quarters reported that over 10,000 hamlets had been organized 
