sists of luxury apartments, hotels and office buildings financed by 
Chinese businessmen or affluent Vietnamese with relatives or 
connections within the regime. The buildings are destined to be 
rented to Americans. Saigon’s workers live, as they always have, 
in fetid slums on the city’s outskirts. . . . Bars and bordellos, 
thousands of young Vietnamese women degrading themselves as 
bar girls and prostitutes, gangs of hoodlums and beggars and 
children selling their older sisters and picking pockets have be¬ 
come ubiquitous features of urban life. 

Many have remarked on the striking difference between the 
way in which the press and the visiting scholar describe what 
they see in Vietnam. It should occasion no surprise. Each is 
pursuing his own craft. The reporter’s job is to describe what he 
sees before his eyes; many have done so with courage and even 
brilliance. The colonial administrator, on the other hand, is con¬ 
cerned to justify what he has done and what he hopes to do, 
and—if an “expert” as well—to construct an appropriate ideo¬ 
logical cover, to show that we are just and righteous in what we 
do, and to put nagging doubts to rest. One sees moral degrada¬ 
tion and fetid slums; the other, prosperity and well-being—and 
if kindly old Uncle Sam occasionally flicks his ashes on someone 
by mistake, that is surely no reason for tantrums. 

Returning to the collection of scholarly and objective studies 
in Asian Survey, the first, by Kenneth Young, president of the 


43 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


Asia Society, describes our difficulties in “transferring innova¬ 
tions and institutions to the Vietnamese” and calls for the assist¬ 
ance of social scientists in overcoming these difficulties. Social 
scientists should, he feels, study “the intricacies that effectively 
inhibit or transfer what the Americans, either by government 
policy or by the technician’s action, want to introduce into the 
mind of a Vietnamese or into a Vietnamese organization.” The 
problem, in short, is one of communication. For this objective 
scholar, there is no question of our right to “transfer innovations 
and institutions to the Vietnamese,” by force if necessary, or of 
our superior insight into the needed innovations or appropriate 
institutions. In just the same way, Lord Cornwallis understood 
the necessity of “transferring the institution” of a squirearchy to 
India—as any reasonable person could see, this was the only 
civilized form of social organization. 

The “scholarly objectivity” that Huntington lauds is further 
demonstrated in the contribution by Milton Sacks, entitled 
“Restructuring Government in South Vietnam.” As Sacks per¬ 
ceives the situation, there are two forces in South Vietnam, the 
“nationalists” and the “Communists.” The “Communists” are the 
Vietminh and the NLF; among the “nationalists,” he mentions 
specifically the VNQDD and the Dai Viet (and the military). 
The “nationalists” have a few problems; for example, they 
“were manipulated by the French, by the Japanese, by the com¬ 
munists and latterly by the Americans,” and “too many of South 
Vietnam’s leading generals fought with the French against the 
Vietnamese people .” 25 Our problem is the weakness of the na¬ 
tionalists, although there was some hope during General 
Khanh’s government, “a most interesting effort because it was a 
genuine coalition of representatives of all the major political 
groups in South Vietnam.” Curiously, this highly representative 
government was unable to accept or even to consider “a pro- 


44 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


posal for what appeared to be an authentic coalition govern¬ 
ment” coming from the National Liberation Front in mid- 
1964. 26 According to Douglas Pike, the proposal could not be 
seriously considered because none of the “non-Communists” in 
South Vietnam, “with the possible exception of the Buddhists, 
thought themselves equal in size and power to risk entering into 
a coalition, fearing that if they did the whale would swallow the 
minnow.” Thus, he continues, “coalition government with a 
strong NLF could not be sold within South Vietnam,” even to 
the government which, as Sacks informs us, was “a genuine 
coalition” of “all the major political groups in South Vietnam.” 
Rather, the GVN and its successors continued to insist that the 
NLF show their sincerity by withdrawing “their armed units 
and their political cadres from South Vietnamese territory” 
(March 1, 1965). 

According to Sacks, “the problem which presents itself is to 
devise an institutional arrangement that will tend to counteract 
the factors and forces which are conducive to that instability” 
that now plagues Vietnamese political life. This problem, of 
course, is one that presents itself to us. And, Sacks feels, it is 
well on its way to solution, with the new constitution and the 
forthcoming (September 1967) elections, which “will provide 
spokesmen who claim legitimacy through popular mandate and 
speak with authority on the issues of war and peace for their 
