not, nor is there yet, legislation of the [Spanish] state to apply” 
and “article 44 of the Constitution declares expropriation and 
socialization are functions of the State.” A decree of August 28 
“gave the government the right to intervene in or take over any 
mining or metallurgical plant.” The anarchist newspaper Soli - 
daridad Obrera reported in October a decision of the department 
of purchases of the Ministry of Defense that it would make 
contracts for purchases only with enterprises functioning “on 
the basis of their old owners” or “under the corresponding in¬ 
tervention controlled by the Ministry of Finance and Econ¬ 
omy.” 86 

Returning to Jackson’s statement that “In Catalonia, the CNT 


92 



Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


factory committees dragged their heels on war production, 
claiming that the government deprived them of raw materials 
and was favoring the bourgeoisie” I believe one must conclude 
that this statement is more an expression of Jackson’s bias in 
favor of capitalist democracy than a description of the historical 
facts. At the very least, we can say this much: Jackson presents 
no evidence to support his conclusion; there is a factual basis 
for questioning it. I have cited a number of sources that the 
liberal historian would regard, quite correctly, as biased in 
favor of the revolution. My point is that the failure of objec¬ 
tivity, the deep-seated bias of liberal historians, is a matter 
much less normally taken for granted, and that there are good 
grounds for supposing that this failure of objectivity has seri¬ 
ously distorted the judgments that are rather brashly handed 
down about the nature of the Spanish revolution. 

Continuing with the analysis of Jackson’s judgments, unsup¬ 
ported by any cited evidence, consider his remark, quoted 
above, that in Barcelona “the naive optimism of the revolu¬ 
tionary conquests of the previous August had given way to 
feelings of resentment and of somehow having been cheated.” It 
is a fact that by January 1937 there was great disaffection in Bar¬ 
celona. But was this simply a consequence of “the unsuspected 
complexity of modern society”? Looking into the matter a bit 
more closely, we see a rather different picture. Under Russian 
pressure, the PSUC was given substantial control of the Cata¬ 
lonian government, “putting into the Food Ministry [in De¬ 
cember 1936] the man most to the Right in present Catalan 
politics, Comorera” 87 —by virtue of his political views, the most 
willing collaborator with the general Communist party position. 
According to Jackson, Comorera “immediately took steps to end 
barter and requisitioning, and became a defender of the peas¬ 
ants against the revolution” (p. 314); he “ended requisition, 


93 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


restored money payments, and protected the Catalan peasants 
against further collectivization” (p. 361). This is all that Jack- 
son has to say about Juan Comorera. 

We learn more from other sources: for example, Borkenau, 
who was in Barcelona for the second time in January 1937—and 
is universally recognized as a highly knowledgeable and expert 
observer, with strong anti-anarchist sentiments. According to 
Borkenau, Comorera represented “a political attitude which can 
best be compared w T ith that of the extreme right wing of the 
German social-democracy. He had always regarded the fight 
against anarchism as the chief aim of socialist policy in Spain. 
. . . To his surprise, he found unexpected allies for his dislike 
[of anarchist policies] in the communists.” 88 It was impossible 
to reverse collectivization of industry at that stage in the pro¬ 
cess of counterrevolution; Comorera did succeed, however, in 
abolishing the system by which the provisioning of Barcelona 
had been organized, namely, the village committees, mostly 
under CNT influence, which had cooperated (perhaps, Bor¬ 
kenau suggests, unwillingly) in delivering flour to the towns. 
Continuing, Borkenau describes the situation as follows: 

. . . Comorera, starting from those principles of abstract liberal¬ 
ism which no administration has followed during the war, but of 
which right-wing socialists are the last and most religious ad¬ 
mirers, did not substitute for the chaotic bread committees a 
centralized administration. He restored private commerce in bread, 
simply and completely. There was, in January, not even a system 
of rationing in Barcelona. Workers were simply left to get their 
bread, with wages which had hardly changed since May, at in¬ 
creased prices, as well as they could. In practice it meant that 
the women had to form queues from four o’clock in the morning 
onwards. The resentment in the working-class districts was natu¬ 
rally acute, the more so as the scarcity of bread rapidly increased 
after Comorera had taken office . 89 


