their government to enter into negotiations. Furthermore, the 
effect of terror bombing is slight in a nonindustrialized country. 
Therefore, he suggests, we should not “go after the spectacular 
targets which cause militarily dubious pain to people in North 
Vietnam,” but rather “after the unspectacular targets which can 


14 


Introduction 


bring some military relief to the infantrymen in the battle on 
the ground/’ even though this is a shame for the pilots, who are 
missing out on the feeling of accomplishment and satisfaction 
that comes from flooding villages, drowning people, and de¬ 
stroying crops. 

By coincidence, the same newspaper published an eyewitness 
report of the bombing of dikes in North Vietnam, just a few 
days later. 8 The correspondent reports: 

Dikes in the fertile Red River delta—North Vietnam’s rice basket 
—have come under increasing air attack lately. The American 
bombing appears intended not only to demoralize and harass the 
population in the most densely populated region of the country, 
but also to destroy the rice crops in the vast alluvial plains with 
their vulnerable open spaces . . . here in the delta region, whose 
paddy fields provide the bulk of the rice supply of 17 million 
North Vietnamese, there have been almost daily attacks on dikes 
along the numerous small confluences of the Red River. . . . The 
pattern of the bombing in the delta seems evident—to interdict 
agricultural production. No military targets are visible in the 
dikes. The heaviest artillery pieces we saw were antiquated rifles 
of the peasant militia. 

As a historical reference point, recall that German High Com¬ 
missioner Seyss-Inquart was condemned to death at Nuremberg 
for opening the dikes in Holland at the time of the Allied inva¬ 
sion. 9 Since the editors of the Christian Science Monitor did not 
feel that this disclosure required editorial comment, I do not 
know whether they regarded Harsch’s sensible argument for the 
bombing of trucks rather than dams as now counterbalanced by 
other considerations. 

As a final illustration of the callousness of the American re¬ 
sponse to what the mass media reveal, consider a small item in 
the New York Times of March 18, 1968, headed, “Army Exhibit 
Bars Simulated Shooting at Vietnamese Hut.” The item reports 


15 


ft - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

an attempt by the “peace movement” to disrupt an exhibit in 
the Chicago Museum of Science and Industry: 

Beginning today, visitors can no longer enter a helicopter for 
simulated firing of a machine gun at targets in a diorama of the 
Vietnam Central Highlands. The targets were a hut, two bridges 
and an ammunition dump, and a light flashed when a hit was 
scored. 

Apparently, it was great fun for the kiddies until those damned 
peaceniks turned up and started one of their interminable dem¬ 
onstrations, even occupying the exhibit. According to the Times 
report, “demonstrators particularly objected to children being 
permitted to ‘fire’ at the hut, even though no people appear 
there or elsewhere in the diorama,” which just shows how un¬ 
reasonable peaceniks can be. Although it is small compensation 
for the closing of this entertaining exhibit, “visitors, however, 
may still test their skills elsewhere in the exhibit by simulated 
firing of an antitank weapon and several models of rifles.” 

What can one say about a country where a museum of sci¬ 
ence in a great city can feature an exhibit in which people fire 
machine guns from a helicopter at Vietnamese huts, with a light 
flashing when a hit is scored? What can one say about a country 
where such an idea can even be considered? You have to weep 
for this country. 

These and a thousand other examples testify to moral degen¬ 
eration on such a scale that talk about the “normal channels” of 
political action and protest becomes meaningless or hypocriti¬ 
cal. We have to ask ourselves whether what is needed in the 
United States is dissent—or denazification. The question is a 
debatable one. Reasonable people may differ. The fact that the 
question is even debatable is a terrifying thing. To me it seems 
that what is needed is a kind of denazification. What is more, 


16 


Introduction 


