long a reformist American administration with a “welfare state” 
domestic orientation would be doing its utmost to prove the 
correctness of Marx’s grim observation about this concept of 
civilization and justice and order: “The civilization and justice 
of bourgeois order comes out in its lurid light whenever the 
slaves and drudges of that order rise against their masters; then 
this civilization and justice stand forth as undisguised savagery 
and lawless revenge.” 

It is conceivable that American actions in Vietnam are simply 
a single outburst of criminal insanity, of no general or long- 
range significance except to the miserable inhabitants of that 
tortured land. It is difficult, however, to put much credence in 
this possibility. In half a dozen Latin American countries there 
are guerrilla movements that are approaching the early stages of 
the second Vietnamese war, and the American reaction is, appar¬ 
ently, comparable. That is, American arms are used to attack 
guerrilla forces and to “dry up the sea in which they swim,” in 
the Maoist terminology affected by the military; and American 
“advisers” guide and train the troops which, as Latin American 
liberals observe, are needed only to occupy their own country in 
the interests of domestic ruling classes and Northern capital. In 
these countries it has not yet become necessary, as in Vietnam, 
to convert the fact of Communist involvement into the myth of 


311 


* - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

Communist aggression in justification of open United States 
control of the counterrevolutionary forces, nor has the time yet 
arrived for application of the full arsenal of terror in support of 
the regime selected as most favorable to American interests. But 
it seems that this next step is fully expected. In Le Nouvel 
Observateur, the peasant organizer Francisco Juliao was re¬ 
cently quoted as certain of United States intervention when 
rebellion breaks out in the Brazilian Northeast Provinces. 
Others, less well known, have expressed themselves similarly. 
There is little basis, in history or logic, for supposing them to be 
wrong—little basis, that is, apart from the kind of sentimental¬ 
ity that sees the United States, alone among nations, as a selfless 
(if rather oafish) public benefactor, devoted only to projects of 
“international good will,” though frequently blundering in an 
excess of warmhearted generosity. One should no doubt take 
seriously the insistence of administration spokesmen that one 
purpose of the present violence is to prove that wars of national 
liberation cannot succeed; to demonstrate, that is, in the clear¬ 
est and most explicit terms, that any revolutionary movement 
