In South Vietnam, the American attack has been far more 
severe, and direct report from its victims is lacking. But some 
statistics tell the story well enough. According to American 
sources, the Vietcong are “able to enlist an estimated 7,000 
recruits a month.” 16 Recently, an extensive propaganda barrage 
has enthusiastically proclaimed that in March 1967 there were 
5,557 defectors from the Vietcong, almost twice as many as in 
any previous month. Only the careful reader would have noted 
that of these “defectors” 630 were identified as military men and 
301 as political cadres, the rest being peasants, probably coming 
for a free meal. 17 Seven thousand new recruits and 630 defec¬ 
tors—these figures indicate graphically by what means the 
American war in Vietnam must be won. 

The preceding description is based on reports in early 1967. 
Rereading it in January 1968, I need hardly emphasize how 
little the situation has changed. The savage battering of the 
Vietnamese continues without pause; in scale, it is unique in the 
history of warfare. We learn that aerial bombardment alone 
exceeds 100 pounds of explosives per person, 12 tons of explo¬ 
sives per square mile, distributed almost equally between North 
and South Vietnam. Hundreds of thousands of acres have been 
subjected to defoliation, with what ultimate consequences no 

231 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


one knows. Refugees in South Vietnam are counted in the mil¬ 
lions. Why have they left their homes? . . the reason why the 
people are forced to abandon their villages and their homes is 
because, in most cases, practically all of the homes are com¬ 
pletely burned to the ground by the American forces. However, 
the people still try to cling to their scorched land, and are re¬ 
moved only by compulsion. . . .” 18 Literate Americans— 
those wdio have followed the w r ell-reported horror story of 
Ben Sue, for example—can supply the details for themselves. 19 
Numerous eyewitness reports have given the lie to the cynical 
pretense that our targets in North Vietnam are purely 
military, targets of “steel and concrete.” The chief editorial 
writer of Asahi Shimbun writes: “I myself walked around 
and inspected the bombed remains of schools, hospitals, 
churches, temples, market places, and other peaceful public 
facilities.” 20 Lee Lockwood, Harrison Salisbury, David 
Schoenbrun, and others have elaborated, for those who wish 
to know. It is no longer denied that antipersonnel weapons 
