
“More than 600 organizers of collectives have been arrested. The 
government has appointed management committees that seized the 
warehouses and distributed their contents at random. Land, draught 
animals, and tools were given to individual families or to the fascists 
who had been spared by the revolution. The harvest was distributed in 
the same way. The animals raised by the collectives suffered the same 
152 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


fate. A great number of collectivized pig farms, stables, and dairies 
were destroyed. In certain communes, such as Bordon and Calaceite, 
even seed was confiscated and the peasants are now unable to work 
the land.” 

The estimate that 30% of the collectives were destroyed is consistent 
with figures reported by Peirats ( Los anarquistas en la crisis politica 
espahola, p. 300). He points out that only 200 delegates attended the 
congress of collectives of Aragon in September 1937 (“held under the 
shadow of the bayonets of the Eleventh Division” of Lister) as com¬ 
pared with 500 delegates at the congress of the preceding February. 
Peirats states that an army division of Catalan separatists and another 
division of the PSUC also occupied parts of Aragon during this opera¬ 
tion, while three anarchist divisions remained at the front, under or¬ 
ders from the CNT-FAI leadership. Compare Jackson’s explanation of 
the occupation of Aragon: “The peasants were known to hate the 
Consejo, the anarchists had deserted the front during the Barcelona 
fighting, and the very existence of the Consejo was a standing chal¬ 
lenge to the authority of the central government” (italics mine). 

10S. Regarding Bolloten’s work, Jackson has this to say: “Throughout 
the present chapter, I have drawn heavily on this carefully docu¬ 
mented study of the Communist Party in 1936-37. It is unrivaled in its 
coverage of the wartime press, of which Bolloten, himself a UP cor¬ 
respondent in Spain, made a large collection” (p. 363 n.). 

109. See note 64. A number of citations from Berneri’s writings are 
given by Broue and Temime. Morrow also presents several passages 
from his journal, Guerra di Classe. A collection of his works would be 
a very useful contribution to our understanding of the Spanish Civil 
War and to the problems of revolutionary war in general. 

110. Cattell, op. cit., p. 208. See also the remarks by Borkenau, 
Brenan, and Bolloten cited earlier. Neither Cattell nor Borkenau re¬ 
gards this decline of fighting spirit as a major factor, however. 

111. Op. cit., p. 195, n. 7. 

112. To this extent, Trotsky took a similar position. See his Lesson of 
Spain (London, Workers’ International Press, 1937). 

113. Cited in Richards, op. cit., p. 23. 

114. H. E. Kaminski, Ceux de Barcelone (Paris, Les Editions Denocl, 
1937), p. 181. This book contains very interesting observations on 
anarchist Spain by a skeptical though sympathetic eyewitness. 


153 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


115. May 15, 1937. Cited by Richards, op. cit., p. 106. 

116. Cited by Broue and Temime, op. cit., p. 258, n. 34. The con¬ 
quest of Saragossa was the goal, never realized, of the anarchist militia 
in Aragon. 

117. Ibid., p. 175. 

118. Ibid., p. 193. 

119. The fact was not lost on foreign journalists. Morrow {op. cit., p. 
68) quotes James Minifie in the New York Herald Tribune, April 28, 
1937: “A reliable police force is being built up quietly but surely. The 
Valencia government discovered an ideal instrument for this purpose 
in the Carabineros. These were formerly customs officers and guards, 
and always had a good reputation for loyalty. It is reported on good 
authority that 40,000 have been recruited for this force, and that 
20,000 have already been armed and equipped. . . . The anarchists 
have already noticed and complained about the increased strength of 
this force at a time when we all know there’s little enough traffic 
coming over the frontiers, land or sea. They realize that it will be used 
against them.” Consider what these soldiers, as well as Lister’s division 
or the asaltos described by Orwell, might have accomplished on the 
Aragon front, for example. Consider also the effect on the militiamen, 
deprived of arms by the central government, of the knowledge that 
these well-armed, highly trained troops were liquidating the accom¬ 
plishments of their revolution. 

120. Cited in Rocker, The Tragedy of Spain, p. 37. 

121. For references, see Bolloten, op. cit., p. 192, n. 12. 

122. Cited in Rocker, The Tragedy of Spain, p. 37. 
