power over adjoining regions.” Such a base would permit the 
formation of a regional organization, under our dominance, that 
would make possible “direct intervention in Korea, Vietnam,. 
Laos and Cambodia” without the onus of unilateral interven¬ 
tion (“in the face of brazen communist aggression, it is not the 
fact of intervention as such that constitutes the issue but rather 
its unilateral character”). 

We must understand that for the preservation of Western 
interests, there is no reasonable alternative to the construction 
of such a base of power in territories over which we possess 
direct sovereignty. We cannot maintain the “historic connec¬ 
tion” between Asia and the West unless we participate in Asian 
affairs “through the exercise of power and influence.” We must 
accept “the fact that we are engaged in a serious struggle for 
cultural survival that involves that continuous presence of 
Western-oriented communities” in Asia. It is an illusion to be¬ 
lieve that we can retreat from Asia and leave it to its own 
devices, for our own Western culture must be understood as “a 
minority movement of recent date in the evolution of civiliza¬ 
tion.” and it cannot be taken for granted that Asia will remain 


69 - 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


*= 

“incapable of intervening in our affairs.” Thus to defend our¬ 
selves, we must intervene with force in the affairs of Asia. If we 
fail to establish “our industrial enterprise system” universally, 
we will have to “defend our privileges and gains by means of 
the continuing, brutalizing, and costly exercise of superior force 
in every corner of the globe.” 

Why are we justified in forceful intervention in the affairs of 
Asia? “One obvious justification for United States intervention 
in Asian affairs lies in our leadership of the world struggle 
against communism. Communist political and economic infiltra¬ 
tion among a majority of the world’s peoples appears to Ameri¬ 
can political leadership to be fatal to our safety and progress; 
this attitude is supported almost unanimously by public opin¬ 
ion.” Pursuing this logic a few steps further, we will soon have 
the same “obvious justification” for taking out China with nu¬ 
clear weapons—and perhaps France as well, for good meas¬ 
ure. 

Further justification is that the defense of our western sea¬ 
board “requires that the North Pacific be controlled as a virtual 
American lake,” a fact which “provides one basis for United 
States intervention in power struggles throughout the region,” 
to preserve the security of this mare nostrum . Our “victory over 
Japan left a power vacuum in Southeast Asia and the Far East 
that was tempting to communist aggression; therefore, we had 
to step in and use our military power.” “Island possessions, such 
as Guam, those of the strategic trust territories, and probably 
Okinawa, remain indispensable, if not to the narrow defense of 
our shores, certainly to the military posture essential to our total 
security and world aims .” 45 Apart from the magnificent scope 
of this vision, rarely equaled by our forerunners, the termi¬ 
nology is not unfamiliar. 

There are, to be sure, certain restraints that we must observe 


70 




Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


as we design our policy of establishing an “operational base” for 
exercise of power in the Far East; specifically, “policy must rest 
on political and social objectives that are acceptable to, or 
capable of being imposed upon, all participating elements ” 
Obviously, it would not be pragmatic to insist upon policies 
that are not capable of being imposed upon the participating 
elements in our new dominions. 

These proposals are buttressed with a brief sketch of the 
consequences of Western dominion in the past, for example, the 
“Indian success story,” in which “enterprise capital proved a 
useful incentive to fruitful social change in the subcontinent of 
India and its environs,” a development flawed only by the pas¬ 
sivity shown by “traditional Asian social systems” as they imi¬ 
tated “the industrial ideology of their colonial tutor.” An impor¬ 
tant lesson to us is the success of the “neutral Pax Britannica” in 
imposing order, so that “commerce could flourish and its fruits 
compensate for vanished liberties.” 

Adam spares us the observation that the ungrateful natives 
sometimes fail to appreciate these centuries of solicitude. Thus 
to a left-wing member of the Congress party in India: “The story 
is that the British, in the process of their domination over India, 
kept no limits to brutality and savagery which man is capable 
