

Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


tained that we have in effect already achieved “the egalitarian 
and socially mobile society which the ‘free floating intellectuals' 
associated with the Marxist tradition have been calling for 
during the last hundred years.” Granting the obvious general 
rise in standard of living, the judgment of Gunnar Myrdal 
seems far more appropriate to the actual situation when he 
says: “The common idea that America is an immensely rich and 
affluent country is very much an exaggeration. American afflu¬ 
ence is heavily mortgaged. America carries a tremendous bur¬ 
den of debt to its poor people. That this debt must be paid is 
not only a wish of the do-gooders. Not paying it implies a risk 
for the social order and for democracy as we have known it.” 11 
Surely the claim that all groups can easily enter the mass-con¬ 
sumption economy and “erase the visible demarcations” is a 
considerable exaggeration. 

Similar evaluations of American society appear frequently in 
contemporary scholarship. To mention just one example, con¬ 
sider the analysis that Adam Ulam gives of Marx’s concept of 
capitalism: “One cannot blame a contemporary observer like 
Marx for his conviction that industrial fanaticism and self-right¬ 
eousness were indelible traits of the capitalist. That the capital¬ 
ist would grow more humane, that he would slacken in his 
ceaseless pursuit of accumulation and expansion, were not im¬ 
pressions readily warranted by the English social scene of the 
1840’s and ’50’s.” 12 Again, granting the important changes in 
industrial society over the past century, it still comes as a sur¬ 
prise to hear that the capitalist has slackened in his ceaseless 
pursuit of accumulation and expansion. 13 

Remarks such as these illustrate a failure to come to grips 
with the reality of contemporary society which may not be 
directly traceable to the newly found (or at least hopefully 
sought) access to power and affluence, but which is, neverthe- 


29 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


less, what one would expect in the developing ideology of a 
new privileged elite. 

Various strands of this ideology are drawn together in a re¬ 
cent article by Zbigniew Brzezinski, 14 in which a number of the 
conceptions and attitudes that appear in recent social thought 
are summarized—I am tempted to say “parodied.” Brzezinski 
too sees a “profound change” taking place in the intellectual 
community, as “the largely humanist-oriented, occasionally 
ideologically-minded intellectual-dissenter, who sees his role 
largely in terms of proffering social critiques, is rapidly being 
displaced either by experts and specialists, who become in¬ 
volved in special governmental undertakings, or by the gener- 
alists-integrators, who become in effect house-ideologues for 
those in power, providing overall intellectual integration for 
disparate actions.” He suggests that these “organisation-ori¬ 
ented, application-minded intellectuals” can be expected to in¬ 
troduce broader and more relevant concerns into the political 
system—though there is, as he notes, a danger that “intellectual 
detachment and the disinterested search for truth” will come to 
an end, given the new access of the “application-minded intellect¬ 
uals” to “power, prestige, and the good life.” They are a new 
meritocratic elite, “taking over American life, utilising the uni¬ 
versities, exploiting the latest techniques of communications, 
harnessing as rapidly as possible the most recent technological 
devices.” Presumably, their civilizing impact is revealed by the 
great progress that has been made, in this new “historical era” 
that America alone has already entered, with respect to the prob¬ 
lems that confounded the bumbling political leaders of past eras 
—the problems of the cities, of pollution, of waste and destruc¬ 
tiveness, of exploitation and poverty. Under the leadership of this 
“new breed of politicians-intellectuals,” America has become “the 
creative society; the others, consciously and unconsciously, are 


30 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


emulative.” We see this, for example, in mathematics, the bio¬ 
logical sciences, anthropology, philosophy, cinema, music, his¬ 
torical scholarship, and so on, where other cultures, hopelessly 
outdistanced, merely observe and imitate what America creates. 
Thus we move towards a new world-wide “ ‘super-culture/ 
strongly influenced by American life, with its own universal 
electronic-computer language,” with an enormous and growing 
“psycho-cultural gap” separating America from the rest of the 
“developed world.” 

