
In this respect, the analogy to current American behavior in 
Asia fails; more than one American in a hundred understands 
that we have actually violated our commitments, not only at 
Geneva but, more importantly, to the United Nations Charter. 
However, the general observation remains quite valid in the 
changed circumstances of today. It is very difficult to deal with 
the mentality that reinterprets obligations to suit self-interest, 
and may very well be perfectly honest—in some curious sense 
of the word—in so doing. 

Alongside of those who justified the Manchurian intervention 
on the pragmatic grounds of self-interest, those who spoke of a 
new Monroe Doctrine “to maintain the peace of East Asia,” and 
those who fantasied about an “earthly paradise,” 41 there were 
also dissident voices that questioned Japanese policy in a more 
fundamental way. As the military extended its power, dissidents 
were attacked—both verbally and physically—for their betrayal 
of Japan. In 1936, for example, the printing presses of the 


184 


The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


leading Tokyo newspapers were bombed and Captain Nonaka, 
who was in command, posted a Manifesto of the Righteous 
Army of Restoration “which identified those groups most re¬ 
sponsible for the betrayal of the national polity—the senior 
statesmen, financial magnates, court officials, and certain fac¬ 
tions in the army—proclaiming: 

They have trespassed on the prerogatives of the Emperor’s rights 
of supreme command—among other times, in the conclusion of 
the London Naval Treaty and in the removal of the Inspector 
General of Military Education. Moreover, they secretly conspired 
to steal the supreme command in the March Incident; and they 
united with disloyal professors in rebellious places. These are but 
a few of the most notable instances of their villainies. . . , 42 

It is difficult to imagine such a development in the United 
States today. Difficult, but not impossible. Consider, for ex¬ 
ample, the column by William H. Stringer on the editorial page 
of the Christian Science Monitor on February 7, 1968, calling 
for an end to “that violent, discouraged, and anarchic thinking 
which disrupts government and adds to Washington’s already 
grievous burdens.” The final paragraph explains why the “carp¬ 
ing and caterwauling from the pseudointellectual establish¬ 
ment” must cease: 

Certainly this time of crucial decisions is a time to uphold the 
government—President and Congress—with our prayers. Yes, to 
see that no mist of false doctrine or sleazy upbringing can upset 
the constitutional order which gives thrust and purpose to our 
country. And to remind ourselves and affirm that our leaders 
have the utilization of ever-present intelligence and wisdom from 
on high, that they indeed can perceive and follow the “path 
which no fowl knoweth.” (Job 28) [Italics mine] 

One would have to search with some diligence in the literature 
of totalitarianism to find such a statement. An obscure Japanese 
military officer condemns the disloyal professors and other be- 


185 


+= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


trayers who have trespassed on the imperial prerogatives; a 
writer for one of our most distinguished and “responsible” 
newspapers denounces the pseudointellectuals of false doctrine 
and sleazy upbringing who refuse to recognize that our leaders 
are divinely inspired. There are, to be sure, important differences 
between the two situations; thus Captain Nonaka bombed the 
printing presses, whereas his contemporary equivalent is fea¬ 
tured by the responsible American press. 

As Toynbee had noted earlier, 43 Japan’s 

economic interests in Manchuria were not superfluities but vital 
necessities of her international life. . . . The international position 
of Japan—with Nationalist China, Soviet Russia, and the race¬ 
conscious English-speaking peoples of the Pacific closing in upon 
her—had suddenly become precarious again. 

These special interests had repeatedly been recognized by the 
United States. Both China and Japan regarded the Root-Taka- 
hira Agreement of 1908 as indicating “American acquiescence 
in the latter’s position in Manchuria.” 44 Secretary of State 
Bryan, in 1915, stated that “the United States frankly recog¬ 
nized that territorial contiguity creates special relations be¬ 
tween Japan and these districts” (Shantung, South Manchuria, 
and East Mongolia); and the Lansing-Ishii Notes of 1917 stated 
