for independence from Chinese domination. Thus they reject 
the claim that by attacking Vietnamese Communism we are 
somehow “containing Chinese Communism”—a claim implied, 
for example, in the statement of the “Citizens Committee for 
Peace with Freedom in Vietnam,” in which Ithiel Pool, Milton 
Sacks, and others, speaking for “the understanding, independ¬ 
ent and responsible men and women who have consistently 
opposed rewarding international aggressors from Adolf Hitler 
to Mao Tse-tung,” warn that if we “abandon Vietnam,” then 


51 


* = AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

“Peking and Hanoi, flushed with success, [will] continue their 
expansionist policy through many other ‘wars of liberation.’ ” By 
misstating the reference to Titoist tendencies, Pool avoids the 
difficulty of explaining how an anti-Chinese North Vietnam is 
serving as the agent of Hitlerian aggression from Peking; by 
referring to “lay public debate,” he hopes, I presume, to dis¬ 
guise the failure of argument by a claim to expertise. 

Returning again to the Asian Survey Vietnam symposium, the 
most significant contribution is surely Edward Mitchell’s discus¬ 
sion of his RAND Corporation study on “the significance of 
land tenure in the Vietnamese insurgency.” In a study of twenty- 
six provinces, Mitchell has discovered a significant correlation 
between “inequality of land tenure” and “extent of Government 
[read: American] control.” In brief, “greater inequality 
implies greater control.” “Provinces seem to be more secure 
when the percentage of owner-operated land is low (tenancy 
is high); inequality in the distribution of farms by size is 
great; large, formerly French-owned estates are present; 
and no land redistribution has taken place.” To explain 
this phenomenon, Mitchell turns to history and behavioral 
psychology. As he notes, “in a number of historical cases 
it has been the better-to-do peasant who has revolted, 
while his poorer brothers actively supported or passively ac¬ 
cepted the existing order.” The “behavioral explanation” lies “in 
the relative docility of poorer peasants and the firm authority of 
landlords in the more ‘feudal’ areas . . . the landlord can exer¬ 
cise considerable influence over his tenant’s behavior and read¬ 
ily discourage conduct inconsistent with his own interests.” 

In an interview with the New York Times (October 15, 1967), 
Mitchell adds an additional explanation for the fact that the 
most secure areas are those that remain “essentially feudal in 
social structure”: when the feudal structure is eliminated, 
