marily a reaction to the frustration of Western power in Asia, 
but there is no doubt that the massive convulsions in Asia, and 
the heroic Vietnamese resistance to American power, have 
served as a catalytic agent, releasing forces that might have 
remained latent. In itself, this disorder is neither good nor bad, 
a cause neither for hope nor for despair. It remains to be seen 
whether this disorder can be converted into a force that will 
revitalize American society, or whether it will settle into dead¬ 
ening repression, or will simply subside, to little effect. 

It should be clear to a rational man that the chances for 
survival, let alone a decent existence, are rather slight if Ameri¬ 
can power continues to be used with such abandon as in the 
past few years, or even flaunted so freely. The capacity of the 
national state for violence and coercion, the threat that it poses 
to the survival of its citizens, are so extreme that other problems 
seem to fade in comparison. But this violence cannot be met and 
overcome without regard for its social roots. Just prior to the 
Second World War, America was in the depths of depression, 


402 


Epilogue 


with nine million unemployed. It is difficult to fault this evalua¬ 
tion of the social and economic policies of the 1930s: “The New 
Deal failed to solve the problem of depression, it failed to raise 
the impoverished, it failed to redistribute income, it failed to 
extend equality and generally countenanced racial discrimination 
and segregation. It failed generally to make business more re¬ 
sponsible to the social welfare or to threaten business’ pre¬ 
eminent political power” (Barton J. Bernstein, “The New Deal: 
The Conservative Achievements of Liberal Reform,” in B. J. 
Bernstein, ed., Towards a New Past [New York, Pantheon 
Books, 1968]). Since the national mobilization of World War II, 
we have spent over a trillion dollars on “defense.” It hardly is 
necessary to resort to the “new economics” to show that such 
measures can reduce unemployment and keep the economy func¬ 
tioning, as it requires little political insight to see why the govern¬ 
ment is likely to expend the resources it commands on research 
and development that yield no immediate profit, on missiles and 
“fast-deployment logistic ships” rather than on a mass transpor¬ 
tation system that will conflict with the needs of the oil com¬ 
panies and automotive industry, on nerve gas and manned 
orbital laboratories rather than on farming the oceans (while 
wealthy farmers and farm industries are subsidized to cut back 
agricultural production). It is reasonably clear that unless the 
commercial and industrial system comes under some sort of 
popular democratic control, political democracy will be a sham 
and state power will continue to serve inhuman ends. It is 
easy to say that new thinking and social experimentation are 
needed to free us from the paralysis and fears that narrow our 
vision and direct national energies to destruction and waste, 
that it is necessary to develop social and political consciousness 
through participation and popular control in decision making. 
It is also correct. There now exist opportunities for change that 


403 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


are not very likely to recur. In part, they are traceable to the 
strange and paradoxical touching of extremes to which Marx 
alluded. The question of how Asian revolutions will in time 
react on America, and through America on Europe, is very real. 
It is a question that calls not for speculation, but for com¬ 
mitment and thought and action. 


404 





















