area just prior to the fall of Malaga on February 8, 1937. But 
Borkenau’s detailed observations tend to bear out the anarchist 
“explanation,” at least in part. He believed that Malaga might 
have been saved, but only by a “fight of despair” with mass 
involvement, of a sort that “the anarchists might have led.” But 
two factors prevented such a defense: first, the officer assigned 
to lead the defense, Lieutenant Colonel Villalba, “interpreted 
this task as a purely military one, whereas in reality he had no 
military means at his disposal but only the forces of a popular 
movement”; he was a professional officer, “who in the secrecy of 
his heart hated the spirit of the militia” and was incapable of 
comprehending the “political factor.” 92 A second factor was the 
significant decline, by February, of political consciousness and 
mass involvement. The anarchist committees were no longer 
functioning and the authority of the police and Civil Guards 
had been restored. “The nuisance of hundreds of independent 
village police bodies had disappeared, but with it the passionate 
interest of the village in the civil war. . . . The short interlude of 
the Spanish Soviet system was at an end” (p. 212). After re- 


98 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


viewing the local situation in Malaga and the conflicts in the 
Valencia government (which failed to provide support or arms 
for the militia defending Malaga), Borkenau concludes (p. 
228): “The Spanish republic paid with the fall of Malaga for 
the decision of the Right wing of its camp to make an end of 
social revolution and of its Left wing not to allow that. 5 ’ Jack¬ 
son’s discussion of the fall of Malaga refers to the terror and 
political rivalries within the town but makes no reference to the 
fact that Borkenau’s description, and the accompanying inter¬ 
pretation, do support the belief that the defeat was due in large 
measure to low morale and to the incapacity, or unwillingness, 
of the Valencia government to fight a popular war. On the 
contrary, he concludes that Colonel Villalba’s lack of means for 
“controlling the bitter political rivalries” was one factor that 
prevented him from carrying out the essential military tasks. 
Thus he seems to adopt the view that Borkenau condemns, that 
the task was a “purely military one.” Borkenau’s eyewitness 
account appears to me much more convincing. 

In this case too Jackson has described the situation in a 
somewhat misleading fashion, perhaps again because of the 
elitist bias that dominates the liberal-Communist interpretation 
of the Civil War. Like Lieutenant Colonel Villalba, liberal his¬ 
