that social science can support a technology of social tinkering 
on a domestic or international scale. He then takes a further 
step, proceeding, in a familiar way, to claim universal validity 
for what is in fact a class interest: he argues that the special 
conditions on which his claims to power and authority are 
based are, in fact, the general conditions through which alone 
modern society can be saved; that social tinkering within a 
welfare state framework must replace the commitment to the 
“total ideologies” of the past, ideologies which were concerned 
with a transformation of society. Having found his position of 
power, having achieved security and affluence, he has no fur¬ 
ther need for ideologies that look to radical change. The scholar- 
expert replaces the “free-floating intellectual” who “felt that the 
wrong values were being honored, and rejected the society,” 
and who has now lost his political role (now, that is, that the 
right values are being honored). 

Conceivably, it is correct that the technical experts who will 
(or hope to) manage the “postindustrial society” will be able to 
cope with the classic problems without a radical transformation 
of society. Just so, it is conceivably true that the bourgeoisie 
was right in regarding the special conditions of its emancipation 


345 


+ - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

as the general conditions through which alone modern society 
would be saved. In either case, an argument is in order, and 
skepticism is justified where none appears. 

Within the same framework of general utopianism, Bell goes 
on to pose the issue between welfare state scholar-experts and 
Third World ideologists in a rather curious way. He points out, 
quite correctly, that there is no issue of Communism, the content 
of that doctrine having been “long forgotten by friends and 
foes alike.” Rather, he says, “the question is an older one: 
whether new societies can grow by building democratic institu¬ 
tions and allowing people to make choices—and sacrifices— 
voluntarily, or whether the new elites, heady with power, will 
impose totalitarian means to transform their countries.” The 
question is an interesting one; it is odd, however, to see it 
referred to as “an older one.” Surely he cannot be suggesting 
that the West chose the democratic way—for example, that in 
England during the industrial revolution, the farmers voluntar¬ 
ily made the choice of leaving the land, giving up cottage 
industry, becoming an industrial proletariat, and voluntarily de¬ 
cided, within the framework of the existing democratic institu¬ 
tions, to make the sacrifices that are graphically described in the 
classic literature on nineteenth-century industrial society. One 
may debate the question whether authoritarian control is neces¬ 
sary to permit capital accumulation in the underdeveloped 
w r orld, but the Western model of development is hardly one 
that we can point to with any pride. It is perhaps not surprising 
to find a Walt Rostow referring to “the more humane processes 
[of industrialization] that Western values would suggest.” 27 
Those who have a serious concern for the problems that face 
backward countries and for the role that advanced industrial 
societies might, in principle, play in development and moderni- 


346 


The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


zation must use somewhat more care in interpreting the signifi¬ 
cance of the Western experience. 

Returning to the quite appropriate question, whether “new 
societies can grow by building democratic institutions” or only 
by totalitarian means, I think that honesty requires us to recog¬ 
nize that this question must be directed more to American intel¬ 
lectuals than to Third World ideologists. The backward coun¬ 
tries have incredible, perhaps insurmountable problems, and 
few available options; the United States has a wide range of 
options, and has the economic and technological resources, 
though evidently neither the intellectual nor the moral re¬ 
sources, to confront at least some of these problems. It is easy 
for an American intellectual to deliver homilies on the virtues of 
freedom and liberty, but if he is really concerned about, say, 
Chinese totalitarianism or the burdens imposed on the Chinese 
peasantry in forced industrialization, then he should face a task 
that is infinitely more significant and challenging—the task of 
creating, in the United States, the intellectual and moral cli¬ 
mate, as well as the social and economic conditions, that would 
permit this country to participate in modernization and devel¬ 
opment in a way commensurate with its material wealth and 
technical capacity. Massive capital gifts to Cuba and China 
might not succeed in alleviating the authoritarianism and terror 
that tend to accompany early stages of capital accumulation, 
but they are far more likely to have this effect than lectures on 
democratic values. It is possible that even without “capitalist 
encirclement” in its varying manifestations, the truly democratic 
elements in revolutionary movements—in some instances so¬ 
viets and collectives, for example—might be undermined by an 
“elite” of bureaucrats and technical intelligentsia; but it is a 
