
62. Holland and Mitchell, op. cit., p. 220. Parenthetically, we may 
remark that American postwar Philippine policy served to perpetuate 
what United Nations representative Salvador Lopez calls the prewar 
“system rooted in injustice and greed” which “required the riveting of 
the Philippine economy to the American economy through free trade 
arrangements between the two countries,” and which, in “tacit al- 

215 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


legiance with the Filipino economic elite” led to a “colonial economy 
of the classical type” (“The Colonial Relationship,” in Frank H. 
Golay, ed., The United States and the Philippines [Englewood Cliffs, 
N.J., Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1966], pp. 7-31). Furthermore, this “short¬ 
sighted policy of pressing for immediate commercial advantage” inter¬ 
rupted the Philippine revolution that was under way at the time of the 
American conquest. This “interruption” continued, for example, with 
the policies of Magsaysay, who “cleared away the ambivalence which 
had arisen in the persistent experimentation with public corporations 
of various kinds by a firm avowal that public policy would reflect faith 
in and dependence upon private enterprise” (Frank H. Golay, “Eco¬ 
nomic Collaboration: The Role of American Investment,” in ibid., p. 
109). One effect of this “improvement” in “the political and economic 
aspects of the investment climate” was that from 1957 to 1963 “earn¬ 
ings accruing to American foreign investors were in excess of twice 
the amount of direct foreign investment in the Philippines,” an inter¬ 
esting case of foreign aid. In fact, the preferential trade relations 
forced on the Philippines in 1946 virtually guaranteed American 
domination of the economy. Two Filipino economists, writing in the 
same volume, point out that “acceptance of the Trade Act by the 
Philippines was the price for war damage payments. In view of the 
prevailing economic circumstances, Filipinos had no alternative but to 
accept, after considerable controversy and with obvious reluctance” 
(p. 132). But the “compensating” rehabilitation act was itself some¬ 
thing of a fraud, since “the millions of dollars of war damage pay¬ 
ments ... in effect went back to the United States in the form of 
payments for imports, to the benefit of American industry and labor” 
(p. 125). 

63. Figures from John E. Orchard and H. Foster Bain, in Barnes, op. 
cit., pp. 39-83, 185-212. 

64. Op. cit., pp. 226, 233. 

65. Royama, op. cit., p. 120. He adds that the new government was 
“provisional,” and willing even to accept members of the Kuomintang 
