
May 1937, came a direct attack on the working class in Barce¬ 
lona (the May Days). 70 Following the success of this attack, 
the process of liquidation of the revolution was completed. The 
collectivization decree of October 24 was rescinded and indus¬ 
tries were “freed” from workers’ control. Communist-led armies 
swept through Aragon, destroying many collectives and dis¬ 
mantling their organizations and, generally, bringing the area 
under the control of the central government. Throughout the 
Republican-held territories, the government, now under Com¬ 
munist domination, acted in accordance with the plan an¬ 
nounced in Pravda on December 17, 1936: “So far as Catalonia 
is concerned, the cleaning up of Trotzkyist and Anarcho-Syndi¬ 
calist elements there has already begun, and it will be carried 
out there with the same energy as in the U.S.S.R.” 71 —and, we 
may add, in much the same manner. 

In brief, the period from the summer of 1936 to 1937 was one 
of revolution and counterrevolution: the revolution was largely 
spontaneous with mass participation of anarchist and socialist 
industrial and agricultural workers; the counterrevolution was 
under Communist direction, the Communist party increasingly 
coming to represent the right wing of the Republic. During this 
period and after the success of the counterrevolution, the Re¬ 
public was waging a war against the Franco insurrection; this 
has been described in great detail in numerous publications, 
and I will say little about it here. The Communist-led counter¬ 
revolutionary struggle must, of course, be understood against 
the background of the ongoing antifascist war and the more 
general attempt of the Soviet Union to construct a broad anti¬ 
fascist alliance with the Western democracies. One reason for 
the vigorous counterrevolutionary policy of the Communists 
was their belief that England w^ould never tolerate a revolu¬ 
tionary triumph in Spain, w T here England had substantial com- 


81 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


mercial interests, as did France and to a lesser extent the 
United States. 72 I will return to this matter below. However, I 
think it is important to bear in mind that there were undoubt¬ 
edly other factors as w T ell. Rudolf Rocker’s comments are, I 
believe, quite to the point: 

... the Spanish people have been engaged in a desperate struggle 
against a pitiless foe and have been exposed besides to the secret 
intrigues of the great imperialist powers of Europe. Despite this 
the Spanish revolutionaries have not grasped at the disastrous 
expedient of dictatorship, but have respected all honest convic¬ 
tions. Everyone who visited Barcelona after the July battles, 
whether friend or foe of the C.N.T., was surprised at the freedom 
of public life and the absence of any arrangements for suppress¬ 
ing the free expression of opinion. 

For two decades the supporters of Bolshevism have been 
hammering it into the masses that dictatorship is a vital necessity 
for the defense of the so-called proletarian interests against the 
assaults of the counter-revolution and for paving the way for 
Socialism. They have not advanced the cause of Socialism by this 
propaganda, but have merely smoothed the way for Fascism in 
Italy, Germany and Austria by causing millions of people to 
forget that dictatorship, the most extreme form of tyranny, can 
never lead to social liberation. In Russia, the so-called dictator¬ 
ship of the proletariat has not led to Socialism, but to the domi¬ 
nation of a new bureaucracy over the proletariat and the whole 
people. . . . 

What the Russian autocrats and their supporters fear most is 
that the success of libertarian Socialism in Spain might prove to 
their blind followers that the much vaunted “necessity of a dic¬ 
tatorship” is nothing but one vast fraud which in Russia has led 
to the despotism of Stalin and is to serve today in Spain to help 
the counter-revolution to a victory over the revolution of the 
workers and peasants . 73 

After decades of anti-Communist indoctrination, it is difficult 
to achieve a perspective that makes possible a serious evalua- 


82 




Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


tion of the extent to which Bolshevism and Western liberalism 
have been united in their opposition to popular revolution. 
However, I do not think that one can comprehend the events in 
Spain without attaining this perspective. 

With this brief sketch—partisan, but I think accurate—for 
background, I would like to turn to Jackson’s account of this 
aspect of the Spanish Civil War (see note 54). 

