become legitimate by such indiscriminate slaughter to win the 
victory by breaking the will of the whole nation to continue to 
fight. We need not stop here to consider whether or not “the atom 
bomb comes to force a more fundamental searching of the na¬ 
ture of warfare and of the legitimate means for the pursuit of 
military objectives.” It would be sufficient for my present purpose 
to say that if any indiscriminate destruction of civilian life and 
property is still illegitimate in warfare, then, in the Pacific war, 
this decision to use the atom bomb is the only near approach to 
the directives of the German Emperor during the first World War 
and of the Nazi leaders during the second World War. Nothing 
like this could be traced to the credit of the present accused. 11 

When we lament over the German conscience, we are de¬ 
manding of them a display of self-hatred—a good thing, no 
doubt. But for us the matter is infinitely more serious. It is not a 
matter of self-hatred regarding the sins of the past. Like the 
German Kaiser, we believe that everything must be put to fire 
and sword, so that the war will be more quickly finished—and 
we act on this belief. Unlike the German Kaiser, our soul is not 
torn. We manage a relative calm, as we continue, today, to 
write new chapters of history with the blood of the helpless and 
innocent. 


169 


* - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

Returning to Muste’s radical pacifism in the context of 1941, 
recall that the first of his proposals was that there be no attempt 
“to fasten sole war-guilt on any nation.” The second was that 
measures be taken to assure to all peoples equitable access to 
markets and essential materials. The immediate cause of the 
attack on Pearl Harbor was the recognition, by the Japanese 
military, that it was “now or never.” The Western powers con¬ 
trolled the raw materials on which their existence depended, 
and these supplies were being choked off in retaliation for ex¬ 
pansion on the mainland and association with Germany and 
Italy in the Tripartite Pact. Japan faced an American diplo¬ 
matic offensive aimed at changing it “from a hostile expansionist 
empire, with great pride in its destiny and ambitious plans for 
its future, to a peaceful, contented nation of merchants subcon¬ 
tracting with the United States to aid America’s fight against 
Hitler” 12 —precisely what was achieved by the war, if we re¬ 
place “Hitler” by “the international Communist conspiracy.” To 
understand the Japanese predicament more fully, to evaluate 
the claim that Japan represented the forces of “unprecedented 
evil” arrayed against the American-led “cause of human free¬ 
