able level, to a stage where our economy and society can hardly 
bear the cost. In this respect, it is true, Vietnam is an aberration. 
In all other respects it is a natural consequence of the policy that 
was described three quarters of a century ago by Brooks Adams, 
in prophetic words, when he proclaimed: “Our geographical posi¬ 
tion, our wealth, and our energy pre-eminently fit us to enter 
upon the development of Eastern Asia and to reduce it to part of 
our economic system.” The suppression of the movement for 
Philippine independence, shortly after, was only the first attempt 
to put into practice the policy of reducing Eastern Asia to part 
of our economic system. At that time, we were defending Chris¬ 
tianity from the savage Moros. Now, we are defending the free 
world from the International Communist Conspiracy. In other 


25a 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


respects, little has changed, except for the scale of our attack. 

Again, the example of the Philippine war illustrates the need 
to turn our attention from the problems of Southeast Asia to 
those of the United States—to the ideological commitments on 
which American initiatives are based, and the national self- 
image that permits them to be tolerated with such equanimity; 
in particular, the unshakable belief in American goodwill and 
generosity that persists through each calamity—notably, among 
the self-styled “hardheaded and pragmatic liberals”—and that 
stultifies political thinking and debases political discourse. We 
can, for example, learn a great deal about the sources of Ameri¬ 
can Vietnamese policy by observing how American scholarship 
comes to terms with the suppression of the Philippine struggle 
for independence—in which, incidentally, there were well over 
100,000 Filipino casualties. Thus Louis Halle argues that “we 
could not hand the Philippines back to the Spanish tyranny, 
and they were in no condition to govern themselves or encom¬ 
pass their own defense. If we simply got out and came home we 
would leave chaos behind,” with the Germans and Japanese 
lurking in wait. Therefore, the United States, “having inad¬ 
vertently become responsible for the Philippines, had no alter¬ 
native to assuming, itself, the obligation of governing and 
defending what consequently became the first item of an Ameri¬ 
can overseas empire.” 63 

It need hardly be pointed out that it was the American ex¬ 
peditionary force from whom the Filipinos needed “defense.” 
Nor will I discuss the kind of society that we bequeathed 
them, 64 except to remark that for reasons that are perhaps 
obvious, the Huk guerrillas once again appear to be in control of 
large areas of central Luzon, setting the stage for what may be a 
bloody re-enactment of the tragedy of Vietnam. 

We can also learn a good deal from the reactions of American 


254 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


observers to the tensions that have developed between the 
United States and the Philippines in the postwar period. Con¬ 
sider, for example, the remarks of David Sternberg, 65 who asks 
“what has happened to the Philippine reservoir of good will and 
friendship toward Americans” since formal independence was 
granted to our Philippine colony? To this long-term resident of 
the Philippines and former AID adviser, it appears that there 
were “few complex problems” under the American occupation, 
“once the scars of war had healed and America’s good inten¬ 
tions had gained credence” and “the mass of Filipinos were able 
to relate the realization of their personal hopes and aspirations 
to a benign American presence.” But now, “the commercial 
American, though still benign employer, is also a potential 
competitor.” The old, mutually satisfactory “mentor-student” 
relation, suffused by the warmth of the benign employer to his 
wards, is difficult to reconstruct under the conditions of formal 
independence. Of course, there is hope, for example, in the 
“cultural predisposition toward private enterprise” and the ex¬ 
istence of “a small but highly competent body of planners and 
managers at the top level of the private economic sector.” The 
hope is not dimmed by the fact that seventy years after the 
“benign American presence” was established by force, three 
quarters of the population live under conditions unchanged 
since the Spanish occupation, under the continuing rule of a 
political and economic elite who were “coopted into the colonial 
regime” and have “an affectionate respect for the American way 
of life,” 66 a respect not unrelated, perhaps, to the great privi¬ 
leges that they enjoy as a consequence of the American con¬ 
quest. 67 

It is remarkable to see how easily perceptive and informed 
commentators succeed in deluding themselves as to the charac¬ 
ter of American actions and policies. For example, Roger Hils- 
