38T 







AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


★== 

X. As he analyzes the situation, “the war will end when the 
American middle class wants it to” and “what will cause the 
middle class to want an end to the war will be the conjunction 
of Vietnamese resistance plus the high cost to the middle class 
in effort and money to deal with taxes, inflation, disruption, and 
obstruction at home.” It follows, then, “that the most effective 
antiwar activities are those which are the most disruptive, the 
most costly, those which most undermine the authority of the 
government domestically and in its war policy”—ghetto rebel¬ 
lions (“those elements of the white middle class opposed to the 
war must work to protect participants”), demonstrations such 
as the ones at the Pentagon and at the New York and Oakland 
induction centers, and others that will cause the government’s 
authority to be questioned and that will “escalate the cost” to 
the government. He therefore opposes the individual act of 
“confrontation” and describes the “notion of the alternatives— 
the military, prison, or exile” sketched in my article as “too 
limited, constrained by lack of experience and by lack of a full 
comprehension of what is to be done.” “We have work to do, or 
simply lives to live, and don’t intend to make their job easier or 
our lives more miserable.” His advice is “to make them pay the 
piper, who called the tune. That is what black folks know, who 
sing and dance all the time.” 

My own remarks, accompanying these letters, were not in¬ 
tended as an “answer” but simply as a third, somewhat different 
reaction to the same questions. I have added a few paragraphs 
for publication here. 

Mr. Y and William X agree that middle-class attitudes will be 
decisive in determining the outcome of the American war in 
Vietnam, and that these attitudes will be shaped not by moral 
but by “pragmatic” considerations, considerations of cost. Yet 

388 



Supplement to “On Resistance” 


they arrive at diametrically opposed conclusions regarding the 
appropriate choice of tactics: Mr. Y opposes all forms of resist¬ 
ance and feels that one should try to convince the American 
people “that the war is damned foolishness,” and Mr. X con¬ 
cludes that the “most effective antiwar activities are those which 
are the most disruptive.” Viewing the situation from a rather 
similar perspective, I nevertheless find myself reaching still 
different conclusions. This is hardly astonishing. No one can 
evaluate the effectiveness of various tactics with any precision. 
Furthermore, no course of action open to us offers much hope 
of preventing the Vietnam tragedy from assuming still more 
awesome proportions. We are, unfortunately, discussing tactics 
of limited effectiveness and partially unpredictable conse¬ 
quences. 

I suspect that Mr. Y and Mr. X exaggerate the political signifi¬ 
cance of middle-class opinion. Even if 65 percent or 99 percent 
of the American people were convinced “that the war is 
damned foolishness,” there would remain the problem of trans¬ 
lating this conviction into politically effective action. It is 
doubtful that the political system provides this opportunity in a 
realistic way. Those who feel that an American “victory” in 
Vietnam would be a political and moral tragedy therefore face 
two kinds of tactical problem: first, how to bring “pragmatic 
middle-class opinion” to oppose the war; second, how to give 
effective political expression to such opposition as exists. I am 
not convinced that either correspondent is entirely realistic in 
assessing these matters. 

Consider first the matter of dissent. There is no need to try to 
persuade someone that his taxes are going up, that his neigh¬ 
bor’s son was killed, and that he doesn’t like it. Rather, I feel, 
dissent should be concerned with political and moral issues. 
The American government no doubt commands the resources to 


389 


- AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

end the war through annihilation, and Mr. Y overlooks the fact 
that those who feel that the war is “damned foolishness” may 
perfectly well accept this way of bringing it to an end. Suppose, 
for example, that the military were to decide that the use of 
tactical nuclear weapons would provide the cheapest means for 
