United States.” Of course, we can never really be sure of avoid¬ 
ing the third possibility; therefore, in practice, we will always 
settle for the second, as we are now doing in Brazil and Argen¬ 
tina, for example . 19 

Or consider Walt Rostow’s views on American policy in 
Asia . 20 The basis on which we must build this policy is that “we 
are openly threatened and we feel menaced by Communist 
China.” To prove that we are menaced is of course unnecessary, 
and the matter receives no attention; it is enough that we feel 
menaced. Our policy must be based on our national heritage 
and our national interests. Our national heritage is briefly out¬ 
lined in the following terms: “Throughout the nineteenth cen¬ 
tury, in good conscience Americans could devote themselves to 
the extension of both their principles and their power on this 
continent,” making use of “the somewhat elastic concept of the 
Monroe doctrine” and, of course, extending “the American in¬ 
terest to Alaska and the mid-Pacific islands. . . . Both our insist¬ 
ence on unconditional surrender and the idea of post-war occu¬ 
pation . . . represented the formulation of American security 
interests in Europe and Asia.” So much for our heritage. As to 
our interests, the matter is equally simple. Fundamental is our 
“profound interest that societies abroad develop and strengthen 
those elements in their respective cultures that elevate and 
protect the dignity of the individual against the state.” At the 
same time, we must counter the “ideological threat,” namely 
“the possibility that the Chinese Communists can prove to 
Asians by progress in China that Communist methods are better 
and faster than democratic methods.” Nothing is said about 
those people in Asian cultures to whom our “conception of the 
proper relation of the individual to the state” may not be the 
uniquely important value, people who might, for example, be 


332 




The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


concerned with preserving the “dignity of the individual” 
against concentrations of foreign or domestic capital, or against 
semifeudal structures (such as Trujillo-type dictatorships) in¬ 
troduced or kept in power by American arms. All of this is 
flavored with allusions to “our religious and ethical value sys¬ 
tems” and to our “diffuse and complex concepts” which are to 
the Asian mind “so much more difficult to grasp” than Marxist 
dogma, and are so “disturbing to some Asians” because of “their 
