The Bitter Heritage 


nary deployment of American armies, navies and military bases 
thousands of miles from the United States and mobilized . . . 
against no one but themselves.” In fact, one need hardly be a 
dogmatic Marxist-Leninist to draw the conclusion that we are 
interested in encircling China. This is precisely, for example, 
the view of Charles Wolf, senior economist of the RAND Cor¬ 
poration, who regards it as our major foreign policy task to 
make China “willing to live with this fear” of American encir¬ 
clement (see the congressional hearings before the Subcommit¬ 
tee on the Far East and the Pacific, January 27, 1966). Schles- 
inger evidently thinks of his interpretation as consistent with 
our “philosophical heritage—empirical, pragmatic, ironic, plu¬ 
ralistic, competitive.” It just may be, however, that a more ap¬ 
propriate adjective is “inane.” 

Schlesinger is as aware of what we are doing in Vietnam as 
any reader of the New York Times or /. F. Stone's Weekly . He 
emphasizes that “the war began as an insurrection within South 
Vietnam which, as it has gathered momentum, has attracted 
increasing support and direction from the North” and that the 
result of our bombing of North Vietnam “was to bring North 
Vietnamese forces south of the border,” though on a scale 
which is dwarfed by our own invasion of the country. He real¬ 
izes that “if we continue the pursuit of total military victory, we 
will leave the tragic country gutted and devastated by bombs, 
burned by napalm, turned into a wasteland by chemical defoli¬ 
ation, a land of ruin and wreck,” with its “political and institu¬ 
tional fabric” pulverized. He knows that “our bombers roam 
over the hapless country, dumping more tonnage of explosives 
each month than we were dropping per month on all Europe 
and Africa during the Second World War—more in a year than 
we dropped on the entire Pacific during the Second World 
War.” And he understands the effects on the civilian population 


299 


a- - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

of this attack, unprecedented in scale in the history of warfare. 
All of this arouses in the author feelings of great compassion— 
for President Johnson. (“No thoughtful American can withhold 
sympathy as President Johnson ponders the gloomy choices 
which lie ahead.”) 

It is not that Schlesinger is incapable of indignation. He is 
properly irate about the “warfare in the shadows” of the Viet- 
cong, their “ambush and assassination and torture, leaving be¬ 
hind a trail of burned villages, shattered families and weeping 
women” (the “trail of burned villages” is not further identified, 
but perhaps the cast of characters has become confused at this 
point); and he is not lacking in contempt for those who mob 
the Secretary of Defense or burn draft cards. One wonders 
whether he would have been equally offended by a comparable 
“outpouring of emotion” in Italy in 1935, or Russia in 1956. But 
as far as American actions are concerned, “it is not only idle but 
unfair to seek out guilty men.” Johnson and Humphrey are 
mere “sentimental imperialists,” fundamentally decent men 
with an “Asian vision” that is “not dishonorable,” interested in 
“the salvation of Asia.” 

Not unexpectedly, the Kennedy administration escapes any 
censure, except for its failure to keep up with the press reports 
of what was actually taking place. True, Kennedy introduced 
an army of over 15,000 men, nearly three times the size of the 
Condor Legion sent by Hitler to “fight Communism” in an ear¬ 
lier civil war. But this was simply the “politics of inadvertence.” 
As to the “crisis of credibility,” the implication is that this too is 
a post-Kennedy phenomenon—no one would guess from read¬ 
ing this book that a White Paper of December 1961 was entitled 
“A Threat to the Peace: North Vietnam’s Effort to Con¬ 
quer South Vietnam.” Nor would the reader of The Bitter Her¬ 
itage be likely to guess that not long before, its author was 


300 



The Bitter Heritage 


referring to 1962 as “not a bad year,” with “aggression checked 
in Vietnam,” or reiterating, with apparent approval, a charac¬ 
terization of North Vietnam as “the source of aggression” (A 
Thousand Days). 

Still, in basic respects, Schlesinger’s approach to the conduct 
of international affairs has a certain internal consistency. He 
was opposed to the abortive Cuba invasion in 1961, because of 
his feeling that the planned deception was not likely to succeed, 
not out of any principled objection to such an action. Similarly, 
today, he refers with skepticism to Joseph Alsop’s prediction 
that before too long “the Vietnamese war will look successful” 
from the American point of view, but adds that “we all pray 
that Mr. Alsop will be right.” The liberal view, Schlesinger 
