anyone who is willing to think the matter through. 

Considered as a political tactic, resistance requires careful 
thought, and I do not pretend to have very clear ideas about it. 
Much depends on how events unfold in the coming months. 
Westmoreland’s war of attrition may simply continue with no 
foreseeable end, but the domestic political situation makes this 


380 


On Resistance 


unlikely. If the Republicans do not decide to throw the election 
again, they could have a winning strategy: they can claim that 
they will end the war, and remain vague about the means. 
Under such circumstances, it is unlikely that Johnson will per¬ 
mit the present military stalemate to persist. There are, then, 
several options. The first is American withdrawal, in whatever 
terms it would be couched. It might be disguised as a retreat to 
“enclaves/’ from which the troops could then be removed. It 
might be arranged by an international conference, or by per¬ 
mitting a government in Saigon that would seek peace among 
contending South Vietnamese and then ask us to leave. This 
policy might be politically feasible; the same public relations 
firm that invented terms like “revolutionary development” can 
depict withdrawal as victory. Whether there is anyone in the 
executive branch with the courage or imagination to urge this 
course, I do not know. A number of senators are proposing, in 
essence, that this is the course we should pursue, as are such 
critics of the war as Walter Lippmann and Hans Morgenthau, 
if I understand them correctly. A detailed and quite sensible 
plan for arranging withdrawal along with new, more meaning¬ 
ful elections in the South is outlined by Philippe Devillers in Le 
Monde hebdomadaire of October 26, 1967. Variants can easily 
be imagined. What is central is the decision to accept the prin¬ 
ciple of Geneva that the problems of Vietnam be settled by the 
Vietnamese. 

A second possibility would be annihilation. No one doubts 
that we have the technological capacity for this, and only the 
sentimental doubt that we have the moral capacity as well. 
Bernard Fall predicted this outcome in an interview shortly 
before his death. “The Americans can destroy,” he said, “but 
they cannot pacify. They may win the war, but it will be the 
victory of the graveyard. Vietnam will be destroyed.” 


