uprooting the NLF political and administrative structure in the 
Mekong Delta (with the inevitable solemn statement from 
Freedom House applauding this exercise of limited means to 
show that violence doesn’t pay). The purpose of dissent is to 
mobilize opinion against the use of American force to impose a 
political solution in Vietnam—to the hideous extent it is used 
today, to the still more barbaric extent of tomorrow, or in fact, 
to any extent at all—whatever the costs may be. This is the 
crucial problem that dissent must face with respect to Vietnam 
as well as all of the other countries where American force is 
being used directly, or where American arms and military train¬ 
ing are contributing to internal repression. Contrary to Mr. Y, 
then, I feel that dissent should aim to convince the American 
people that the war is wrong, and to explain why this or any 
similar use of force is wrong. 

Consider next the assumption that opposition to the war will 
mount as its costs visibly increase. It follows that we should 
attempt to increase these costs. Resistance, properly conducted, 
can serve to increase the domestic cost of American aggression 
and can therefore help shape the attitudes of the “pragmatic 
middle classes” of whom Mr. Y speaks, as it can help shape the 
decisions of those who must calculate these costs in setting the 
course of American foreign policy. Mr. Y is surely wrong in 
supposing that those who undertake resistance do so to preserve 
their moral purity. Mr. X’s letter is ample testimony to the fact 
that resistance can be, and I feel quite generally is, undertaken 
as a political act. One may argue that it is misguided, but not 


390 


Supplement to “On Resistance” 


that it is apolitical. Of course, the resister must choose his tac¬ 
tics so as to maximize the probability that the developing oppo¬ 
sition will take a civilized form—in the case of Vietnam, with¬ 
drawal rather than annihilation—and he must accompany his 
resistance with the kind of dissent that will seek to raise the 
general level of political and moral consciousness. These, it 
seems to me, are the conclusions that one should draw from the 
analysis of the situation that Mr. Y proposes. 

To me it seems that draft resistance meets these conditions. 
The principle is clear and unambiguous. An individual’s refusal 
to carry out the criminal acts of his government sets the stage, in 
the most effective way possible, for the attempt to demonstrate 
the criminal nature of these acts. Furthermore, the resistance is 
“costly,” both to the government and to the “pragmatic middle 
classes.” Let us make the matter concrete. Draft resistance is, 
for the moment, strongest among the students at the best uni¬ 
versities. Last month, for example, 320 law school students and 
several hundred students at Yale signed “We Won’t Go” state¬ 
ments. The government will soon have to decide whether to 
draft graduate students. If the resistance continues to grow, the 
decision will be a costly one, no matter how it is made. It is 
politically difficult to give students a blanket exemption, for 
obvious reasons. On the other hand, an attempt to draft stu¬ 
dents will, if resistance develops, put the government in the 
position of tolerating an open violation of the law or of carrying 
out serious punitive acts against the children of the social and 
economic elite. One of the costs of the war is the contempt for 
the government, for its violence and mendacity, felt by many 
young people. Punishment of resisters will deepen this disaffec¬ 
tion, and may channel it in new directions. Involvement of 
adults in support of resisters increases the costs still more. If we 
look beyond Vietnam, the costs may be greater still, not only 


391 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


because of the unpredictable effects of a really large-scale re¬ 
pression of those who are expected to run the society in the 
coming years, but also because of the “danger” inherent in the 
fact that a citizen dares to ask whether he should mechanically 
obey, that he raises questions about the range of meaningful 
political action. 

There are several ways in which one can hope to affect the 
decisions made by the government. One way is to try to influ¬ 
ence the choice that will be offered by the two major political 
parties and to exercise this choice on Election Day. Another, 
very different approach is to try to modify the objective condi¬ 
tions that any elected official must consider when he selects a 
course of action. I do not want to go into the general question 
of the legitimacy of these alternatives, but rather to make two 
points. First, those who are committed to the first method will 
naturally regard political action of the latter sort—draft resist¬ 
ance, for example—as a danger, whose cost they must seek to 
reduce. Secondly, to be realistic, the parliamentary system at 
the moment offers almost no opportunity for meaningful action 
on such issues as Vietnam. One cannot be certain, of course. 
