

AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


and terror. Bolloten cites Communist sources conceding the ex¬ 
cessive harshness of Lister’s methods. He quotes the Communist 
general secretary of the Institute of Agrarian Reform, who 
admits that the measures taken to dissolve the collectives were 
“a very grave mistake, and produced tremendous disorganiza¬ 
tion in the countryside,” as “those persons who were discon¬ 
tented with the collectives . . . took them by assault, carrying 
away and dividing up the harvest and farm implements without 
respecting the collectives that had been formed without vio¬ 
lence or pressure, that were prosperous, and that were a model 
of organization. ... As a result, labour in the fields was sus¬ 
pended almost entirely, and a quarter of the land had not been 
prepared at the time for sowing” (p. 200). Once again, it was 
necessary to ameliorate the harsh repression of the collectives, 
to prevent disaster. Summarizing these events, Bolloten de¬ 
scribes the resulting situation as follows: 

But although the situation in Aragon improved in some degree, 
the hatreds and resentments generated by the break-up of the 
collectives and by the repression that followed were never wholly 
dispelled. Nor was the resultant disillusionment that sapped the 
spirit of the Anarchosyndicalist forces on the Aragon front ever 
entirely removed, a disillusionment that no doubt contributed to 
the collapse of that front a few months later. . . . after the 
destruction of the collective farms in Aragon, the Communist 
Party was compelled to modify its policy, and support collectives 
also in other regions against former owners who sought the re¬ 
turn of confiscated land. . . . [Pp. 200-201] 

Returning to Jackson’s remarks, I think we must conclude 
that they seriously misrepresent the situation. 108 The dissolu¬ 
tion of the Council of Aragon and the large-scale destruction of 
the collectives by military force was simply another stage in the 
eradication of the popular revolution and the restoration of the 
old order. Let me emphasize that I am not criticizing Jackson 


108 



Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


for his negative attitude towards the social revolution, but 
