
Although I agree with Mr. X that resistance can be an effec¬ 
tive political act, I think his analysis errs in three respects. First, 
I think he miscalculates the effect that disruptive actions will 


393 


★== 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


have on the middle class that he wants to move to opposition. 
Second, I think he is considering the notion of “cost” in too 
narrow a sense. And third, I believe that he underestimates the 
force the government commands. As to the first matter, he fails 
to take into account the strong likelihood that disruptive acts 
will increase the urge to win the war by pure terror, with per¬ 
haps a violent repression at home as well. As far as costs are 
concerned, he considers only the matter of “effort and money.” 
But these, I suspect, are negligible costs when we consider the 
kinds of disruptive acts that might be carried out by the white 
middle class, students or adults. The million dollars spent by 
the government on October 21 is a trivial sum for the govern¬ 
ment—but the substantially greater sums expended to mount 
the demonstration are not at all trivial, for the “peace move¬ 
ment.” Hence if the criterion is cost in this sense, the demon¬ 
stration would have to be regarded as a serious setback. In 
general, I think that the important costs that can be increased 
by student and middle-class resistance are the more abstract 
ones discussed earlier. These cannot be calculated in dollars and 
cents, but they are no less real for that. 

As to the matter of government force, I think it is surely 
ample to control, with ease, any disruptive acts that can now be 
foreseen. As Hans Morgenthau observed recently, there has 
been a qualitative shift in the balance of force between a gov¬ 
ernment and a massed populace, and this disparity can only 
increase. A report last June by the Institute of Defense Analysis 
proposed a great many delightful new ideas for “crowd control” 
(itching powder, “sticky blobs to glue rioters together,” chemi¬ 
cal agents, “mechanically spread sticky strings, bands, or adhe¬ 
sives which might slow the movement of the crowd by linking 
people together or to themselves,” foam generators which lead 
to “psychological distress through loss of contact with the en- 


