War is therefore twofold: first, because of the intrinsic interest 
of these events; and second, because of the insight that this 
analysis may provide with respect to the underlying elitist bias 
which I believe to be at the root of the phenomenon of counter¬ 
revolutionary subordination. 

In his study of the Spanish Republic, Jackson makes no at¬ 
tempt to hide his own commitment in favor of liberal democ¬ 
racy, as represented by such figures as Azana, Casares Quiroga, 
Martinez Barrio, 55 and the other “responsible national leaders.” 
In taking this position, he speaks for much of liberal scholar¬ 
ship ; it is fair to say that figures similar to those just mentioned 
would be supported by American liberals, were this possible, in 
Latin America, Asia, or Africa. Furthermore, Jackson makes 
little attempt to disguise his antipathy towards the forces of 
popular revolution in Spain, or their goals. 

It is no criticism of Jackson’s study that his point of view and 
sympathies are expressed with such clarity. On the contrary, the 
value of this work as an interpretation of historical events is 
enhanced by the fact that the author’s commitments are made 
so clear and explicit. But I think it can be shown that Jackson’s 
account of the popular revolution that took place in Spain is 
misleading and in part quite unfair, and that the failure of 
objectivity it reveals is highly significant in that it is character¬ 
istic of the attitude taken by liberal (and Communist) intellec¬ 
tuals towards revolutionary movements that are largely sponta¬ 
neous and only loosely organized, while rooted in deeply felt 
needs and ideals of dispossessed masses. It is a convention of 
scholarship that the use of such terms as those of the preceding 
phrase demonstrates naivete and muddle-headed sentimental- 


75 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


ity. The convention, however, is supported by ideological con¬ 
viction rather than history or investigation of the phenomena of 
social life. This conviction is, I think, belied by such events as 
the revolution that swept over much of Spain in the summer of 
1936. 

The circumstances of Spain in the 1930s are not duplicated 
elsewhere in the underdeveloped world today, to be sure. Nev¬ 
