into the position of the highest virtues,” setting up “avarice and 
usury and precaution . . . [as] . . . our gods,” and pretending to 
ourselves that “fair is foul and foul is fair, for foul is useful and 
fair is not.” If American intellectuals will be preoccupied with 


319 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


such questions as these, they can have an invaluable civilizing 
influence on society and on the schools. If, as is more likely, 
they regard them with disdain as mere sentimental nonsense, 
then our children will have to look elsewhere for enlightenment 
and guidance. 


Notes 

1. The Spanish Cockpit (1938; reprinted Ann Arbor, University of 
Michigan Press, 1963), pp. 288-89. 

2. This essay was written in June 1966; it now goes to press again in 
May 1968. On the use of gas in Vietnam, see Seymour Hersh, “Poison 
Gas in Vietnam,” New York Review of Books , May 9, 1968. On 
current plans for chemical warfare, Science , May 24, 1968, contains 
the following note (p. 863): 

Expanded Chemical Warfare: The Air Force has told Congress that 
it will spend $70.8 million on 10 million gallons of chemicals used for 
Vietnam defoliation and crop-killing in the fiscal year beginning 1 July, 
a $24.9 million increase over this year’s figure. Next year’s expanded 
efforts are in line with the continuing increase in the U.S. chemical 
warfare program in Vietnam. In the first 9 months of 1967, 843,606 
acres in Vietnam were drenched with defoliants and 121,400 acres with 
crop-killing chemicals, a figure which slightly exceeded the totals for 
the whole of 1966. 

In its issue of May 10, 1968, Science carries a letter by Thomas 0. 
Perry of the Harvard University Forest, who comments as follows on 
chemical warfare (p. 601) : 

The DOD can raise the red herring of “long-term” effects, but there 
can be no doubt about the short-term effects: 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T kill 
the green vegetation. When followed by fire bombs, the dead foliage 
and twigs bum, as they did on some 100,000 acres (about 40,000 
hectares) in the “Iron Triangle” last spring. 

Through the simple process of starvation, a land without green 
foliage will quickly become a land without insects, without birds, with¬ 
out animal life of any form. News photographs and on-the-spot 
descriptions indicate that some areas have been sprayed repeatedly to 
320 




Some Thoughts on Intellectuals and the Schools 


assure a complete kill of the vegetation. There can be no doubt that the 
DOD is, in the short run, going beyond mere genocide to biocide. It 
commandeered the entire U.S. production of 2,4,5-T for 1967 and 1968 
[some 13 to 14 million pounds (6.36 million kilos) according to U.S. 
Tariff Commission reports]. If one combines this with the other 
chemicals the DOD concedes it is using, there is a sufficient amount 
to kill 97 percent of the aboveground vegetation on over 10 million 
acres of land (about 4 million hectares)—an area so big that it would 
require over 60 years for a man to walk on each acre. 

The long-term effects of spraying such an area may be imponderable, 
but the short-term effects of using these chemicals are certain: a lot 
of leaves, trees, rice plants, and other vegetation are dead or dying; 
and a lot of insects, birds, animals, and a few humans have either 
migrated or died of starvation. The North Vietnamese are fortunate— 
they have only bombs to contend with. 


321 



THE RESPONSIBILITY OF 
INTELLECTUALS 


Twenty years ago, Dwight Macdonald published a series of 
articles in Politics on the responsibilities of peoples, and specifi¬ 
cally, the responsibility of intellectuals. I read them as an un¬ 
dergraduate, in the years just after the war, and had occasion to 
read them again a few months ago. They seem to me to have 
lost none of their power or persuasiveness. Macdonald is con¬ 
cerned with the question of war guilt. He asks the question: To 
what extent were the German or Japanese people responsible 
for the atrocities committed by their governments? And, quite 
properly, he turns the question back to us: To what extent are 
the British or American people responsible for the vicious terror 
bombings of civilians, perfected as a technique of warfare by 
