
It is relevant to observe, at this point, that a number of the 
Spanish Communist leaders were reluctantly forced to similar 
conclusions. Bolloten cites several examples, 76 specifically, the 
military commander “El Campesino” and Jesus Hernandez, a 
minister in the Caballero government. The former, after his 
escape from the Soviet Union in 1949, stated that he had taken 
for granted the “revolutionary solidarity” of the Soviet Union 
during the Civil War—a most remarkable degree of innocence 
—and realized only later “that the Kremlin does not serve the 
interests of the peoples of the world, but makes them serve its 
own interests; that, with a treachery and hypocrisy without 
parallel, it makes use of the international working class as a 


85 


fr—- AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

mere pawn in its political intrigues.” Hernandez, in a speech 
given shortly after the Civil War, admits that the Spanish 
Communist leaders “acted more like Soviet subjects than sons 
of the Spanish people.” “It may seem absurd, incredible,” he 
adds, “but our education under Soviet tutelage had deformed us 
to such an extent that we were completely denationalized; our 
national soul was torn out of us and replaced by a rabidly 
chauvinistic internationalism, which began and ended with the 
towers of the Kremlin.” 

Shortly after the Third World Congress of the Communist 
International in 1921, the Dutch “ultra-leftist” Hermann Gorter 
wrote that the congress “has decided the fate of the world 
revolution for the present. The trend of opinion that seriously 
desired world revolution . . . has been expelled from the Russian 
International. The Communist Parties in western Europe and 
throughout the world that retain their membership of the Rus¬ 
sian International will become nothing more than a means to 
preserve the Russian Revolution and the Soviet Republic.” 77 
This forecast has proved quite accurate. Jackson’s conception 
that the Soviet Union was a revolutionary power in the late 
1930s, or even that the Soviet leaders truly regarded themselves 
as identified with world revolution, is without factual support. 
It is a misinterpretation that runs parallel to the American Cold 
War mythology that has invented an “international Communist 
conspiracy” directed from Moscow (now Peking) to justify its 
own interventionist policies. 

Turning to events in revolutionary Spain, Jackson describes 
the first stages of collectivization as follows: the unions in 
Madrid, “as in Barcelona and Valencia, abused their sudden 
authority to place the sign incautado [placed under workers’ 
control] on all manner of buildings and vehicles” (p. 279). 


86 



Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


Why was this an abuse of authority? This Jackson does not 
explain. The choice of words indicates a reluctance on Jackson’s 
part to recognize the reality of the revolutionary situation, de¬ 
spite his account of the breakdown of Republican authority. 
The statement that the workers “abused their sudden authority” 
by carrying out collectivization rests on a moral judgment that 
recalls that of Ithiel Pool, when he characterizes land reform in 
Vietnam as a matter of “despoiling one’s neighbors,” or of Franz 
Borkenau, when he speaks of expropriation in the Soviet Union 
as “robbery,” demonstrating “a streak of moral indifference.” 

Within a few months, Jackson informs us, “the revolutionary 
tide began to ebb in Catalonia” after “accumulating food and 
supply problems, and the experience of administering villages, 
frontier posts, and public utilities, had rapidly shown the 
anarchists the unsuspected complexity of modern society” (pp. 
313-14). In Barcelona, “the naive optimism of the revolutionary 
conquests of the previous August had given way to feelings of 
resentment and of somehow having been cheated,” as the cost 
of living doubled, bread was in short supply, and police bru¬ 
tality reached the levels of the monarchy. “The POUM and the 
anarchist press simultaneously extolled the collectivizations and 
explained the failures of production as due to Valencia policies 
of boycotting the Catalan economy and favoring the bour¬ 
geoisie. They explained the loss of Malaga as due in large mea¬ 
sure to the low morale and the disorientation of the Andalusian 
proletariat, which saw the Valencia government evolving stead¬ 
ily toward the right” (p. 368). Jackson evidently believes that 
this left-wing interpretation of events was nonsensical, and that 
in fact it was anarchist incompetence or treachery that was 
responsible for the difficulties: “In Catalonia, the CNT factory 
committees dragged their heels on war production, claiming 


87 


'k - 
