

The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


so it appears, the situation would have been quite different. 

The depression of 1929 marked the final collapse of the at¬ 
tempt of Japanese civilians to live by the rules established by 
the Western powers. Just as the depression struck, the new 
Hamaguchi cabinet adopted the gold standard in an attempt to 
link the Japanese economy more closely with the West, fore¬ 
going the previous attempts at unilateral Sino-Japanese “co¬ 
prosperity.” An immediate consequence was a drastic decline in 
Japanese exports. In 1931, Japan was replaced by the United 
States as the major exporter to China. Japanese exports to the 
United States also declined severely, in part as a result of the 
Smoot-Hawley tariff of June 1930, in part because of the dra¬ 
matic fall in the price of silk. 55 For an industrialized country 
such as Japan, with almost no domestic supplies of raw mate¬ 
rials, the decline in world trade was an unmitigated disaster. 
The Japanese diplomat Mamoru Shigemitsu describes the crisis 
succinctly: 

The Japanese were completely shut out from the European colo¬ 
nies. In the Philippines, Indo-China, Borneo, Indonesia, Malaya, 
Burma, not only were Japanese activities forbidden, but even 
entry. Ordinary trade was hampered by unnatural discriminatory 
treatment. ... In a sense the Manchurian outbreak was the result 
of the international closed economies that followed on the first 
World War. There was a feeling at the back of it that it provided 
the only escape from economic strangulation . 56 

The infamous Yosuke Matsuoka stated in 1931 that “we feel 
suffocated as we observe internal and external situations. What 
we are seeking is that which is minimal for living beings. In 
other words, we are seeking to live. We are seeking room that 
will let us breathe.” 57 Ten years later he was to describe Japan 
as “in the grip of a need to work out means of self-supply and 
self-sufficiency in Greater East Asia.” He asks: “Is it for the 


189 


it; - - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

United States, which rules over the Western Hemisphere and is 
expanding over the Atlantic and the Pacific, to say that these 
ideals, these ambitions of Japan are wrong?” 58 

Western economic policies of the 1930s made an intolerable 
situation still worse, as was reported regularly in the confer¬ 
ences of the Institute of Pacific Relations (IPR). The report of 
the Banff conference of August 1933 noted that “the Indian 
Government, in an attempt to foster its own cotton industry, 
imposed an almost prohibitive tariff on imported cotton goods, 
the effects of which were of course felt chiefly by Japanese 
traders, whose markets in India had been growing rapidly.” 59 
“Japan, which is a rapidly growing industrial nation, has a spe¬ 
cial need for . . . [mineral resources] . . . and is faced with a 
serious shortage of iron, steel, oil, and a number of important 
industrial minerals under her domestic control, while, on the 
other hand, the greater part of the supplies of tin and rubber, 
not only of the Pacific area but for the whole world, are, by 
historical accident, largely under the control of Great Britain 
and the Netherlands.” 60 The same was true of iron and oil, of 
course. In 1932, Japanese exports of cotton piece-goods for the 
first time exceeded those of Great Britain. The Indian tariff, 
mentioned above, w T as 75 percent on Japanese cotton goods and 
25 percent on British goods. The Ottawa conference of 1932 
effectively blocked Japanese trade with the Commonwealth, in¬ 
cluding India. As the IPR conference report noted, “Ottawa had 
dealt a blow to Japanese liberalism.” 

The Ottawa Commonwealth arrangements aimed at con¬ 
structing an essentially closed, autarchic system; the contem¬ 
porary American policy of self-sufficiency proceeded in a similar 
direction. The only recourse available to Japan was to try to 
mimic this behavior in Manchuria. Liberalism was all very well 
when Britannia ruled the waves, but p not when Lancashire in- 


190 



The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


dustry was grinding to a halt, unable to meet Japanese competi¬ 
tion. The Open Door policy was appropriate to an expanding 
capitalist economy, but must not be allowed to block American 
economic recovery. Thus in October 1935, Japan was forced to 
accept an agreement limiting shipments of cotton textiles from 
Japan to the Philippines for two years, while American imports 
remained duty-free. Similarly, revised commercial arrange¬ 
ments with Cuba in 1934 were designed to eliminate Japanese 
competition in textiles, copper wire, electric bulbs, and cello¬ 
phane. 61 
