The “scholarly objectivity” that Huntington lauds is further 
demonstrated in the contribution by Milton Sacks, entitled 
“Restructuring Government in South Vietnam.” As Sacks per¬ 
ceives the situation, there are two forces in South Vietnam, the 
“nationalists” and the “Communists.” The “Communists” are the 
Vietminh and the NLF; among the “nationalists,” he mentions 
specifically the VNQDD and the Dai Viet (and the military). 
The “nationalists” have a few problems; for example, they 
“were manipulated by the French, by the Japanese, by the com¬ 
munists and latterly by the Americans,” and “too many of South 
Vietnam’s leading generals fought with the French against the 
Vietnamese people .” 25 Our problem is the weakness of the na¬ 
tionalists, although there was some hope during General 
Khanh’s government, “a most interesting effort because it was a 
genuine coalition of representatives of all the major political 
groups in South Vietnam.” Curiously, this highly representative 
government was unable to accept or even to consider “a pro- 


44 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


posal for what appeared to be an authentic coalition govern¬ 
ment” coming from the National Liberation Front in mid- 
1964. 26 According to Douglas Pike, the proposal could not be 
seriously considered because none of the “non-Communists” in 
South Vietnam, “with the possible exception of the Buddhists, 
thought themselves equal in size and power to risk entering into 
a coalition, fearing that if they did the whale would swallow the 
minnow.” Thus, he continues, “coalition government with a 
strong NLF could not be sold within South Vietnam,” even to 
the government which, as Sacks informs us, was “a genuine 
coalition” of “all the major political groups in South Vietnam.” 
Rather, the GVN and its successors continued to insist that the 
NLF show their sincerity by withdrawing “their armed units 
and their political cadres from South Vietnamese territory” 
(March 1, 1965). 

According to Sacks, “the problem which presents itself is to 
devise an institutional arrangement that will tend to counteract 
the factors and forces which are conducive to that instability” 
that now plagues Vietnamese political life. This problem, of 
course, is one that presents itself to us. And, Sacks feels, it is 
well on its way to solution, with the new constitution and the 
forthcoming (September 1967) elections, which “will provide 
spokesmen who claim legitimacy through popular mandate and 
speak with authority on the issues of war and peace for their 
