

269 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


would very likely agree to negotiate the problems of Vietnam 
with a government that would at least respond to its diplomatic 
notes. Just what might emerge from the shattered debris of 
South Vietnamese society, no one can predict with any confi¬ 
dence. It is clear, however, that under the American occupation 
there can be only unending tragedy. A few years ago, the 
Premier of Ceylon commented that “the best form of foreign 
aid the United States can give to small countries is to abstain 
from interfering in their affairs.” As applied to Vietnam, at 
least, this grim appraisal is no longer an arguable matter. 

Postscript 

Shortly before his death, Bernard Fall told an interviewer the 
story of a Vietnamese who listened to an American general 
boasting of one of the latest victories of the Vietnam campaign. 
“Yes, General, I understand,” said the Vietnamese, “but aren’t 
your victories coming closer and closer to Saigon?” 83 The pre¬ 
ceding essay was completed in January 1968. Within a week, 
American victories reached Saigon itself. Several months after, 
it seems that the Tet offensive represents a turning point in the 
war. 

For the past decade there have been two versions of the 
tragedy of Vietnam. The first is that of the war correspondents. 
Their message has been that Vietnamese resistance is so deeply 
embedded in the fabric of Vietnamese society that American 
“victory” can be achieved only through annihilation. The sec¬ 
ond is the official story, too familiar to bear repetition. Time 
after time after time the correspondents’ version has been proven 
correct by events. Now, in the wake of the Tet offensive, there 
is only one story. Apart from lonely relics like Joseph Alsop and 
a few Southeast Asian scholars, everyone now seems to under¬ 
stand that there are only two probable endings to the Vietnam 


270 




The Logic of Withdrawal 


tragedy: annihilation or withdrawal of the American army of 
occupation. Annihilation was the prospect foreseen by Bernard 
Fall in the interview just mentioned. He quotes a captured 
prisoner who says, “We will all die, but we will not surrender”; 
and he concludes that “Vietnam will be destroyed.” Spokesmen 
for the NLF and North Vietnam, however, have long argued 
that they can win on the battlefield. In the past their estimates 
have been realistic. It may be that the Tet offensive—which 
brought home to the American public that the official version of 
the Vietnamese story was an illusion or a lie—may also have 
persuaded American policy planners that there are no military 
options remaining, short of drastically changing the nature of 
the war and taking a long step towards World War III. If so, 
this raises the prospects for peace, that is, for withdrawal of the 
American troops. Withdrawal may be called a “negotiated set¬ 
tlement” ; it may be called “victory.” What is important is not 
the words but the substance: the return of Vietnam to the 
Vietnamese. 

It is conceivable, though unlikely, that the Vietnamese resist¬ 
ance will settle for less. One lesson that has been taught them in 
the past twenty years is that the only victories that last are 
military ones. The great powers cannot be trusted. They will 
resort to treachery and subversion to undermine any diplomatic 
settlement. It seems unlikely that the NLF will lay down their 
arms so long as they are able to maintain control of substantial 
parts of South Vietnam, or that they will accept token representa¬ 
tion in a coalition, just as it is unlikely that the French resistance 
twenty-five years ago would have terminated its struggle had it 
been offered the ministry of health in the Vichy government. 

In the last days of January, some 50,000-60,000 Vietcong, 
about 10 percent North Vietnamese, 84 took over most of the 
urban areas of South Vietnam, obviously with the cooperation 


271 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


of hundreds of thousands of urban residents. The American 
response was: destroy. According to the Associated Press, 
“Heavy bombs, aircraft rockets, naval gunfire, napalm, tear gas 
and all the usual ground weapons from eight-inch howitzers to 
