Japanese countryside devastated by conventional bombing in 
which tens of thousands of civilians had been massacred, not to 
speak of the horrifying toll of two atom bombs (the second 
being, so it appears, history’s most abominable experiment); or 
at the news of a final gratuitous act of barbarism, trivial in the 
context of what had just taken place, a thousand-plane raid 
launched after the Japanese surrender had been announced but, 
technically, before it was officially received? 10 To Secretary of 
War Stimson it seemed “appalling that there had been no pro¬ 
test over the air strikes we were conducting against Japan 
which led to such extraordinarily heavy losses of life”; he felt 
that “there was something wrong with a country where no one 
questioned that.” What then are we to say of a country that 
still, twenty years later, is incapable of facing the question of 
war guilt? 

It is not, of course, that the question of war guilt has gone 
out of fashion. No trip to Germany is complete, even today, 
without a ritual sigh and wringing of hands over the failure of 
the German people to face up to the sins of the Nazi era, or the 
German school texts which glide so easily over the Nazi atroci¬ 
ties and the question of war guilt. This is a sure sign of the 
corruption of their nature. Just recently, a group of American 
liberal intellectuals gave their impressions of a tour of West 
Germany in the Atlantic Monthly (May 1967). None failed to 
raise the question of war guilt. One comments that “however 
disparate our temperaments or our political emphases, we were 
plainly a group made coherent by our shared suspicions of 
Germany’s capacity for political health ... we had not forgot¬ 
ten, nor could we forget, that we were in the country which had 


167 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


been able to devise, and implement, Nazism.” The same com¬ 
mentator is impressed with the “dignity and fortitude” with 
which young Germans “carry an emotional and moral burden 
unmatched in history: they have to live with the knowledge 
that their parent generation, and often their own parents, per¬ 
petrated the worst atrocities on the record of mankind.” An¬ 
other, a fervent apologist for the American war in Vietnam, 
asks, “How does a human being ‘come to terms’ with the fact 
that his father was a soulless murderer, or an accomplice to 
