to “win” the war. They plead that the United States lift the 
tight lid that is clamped on political expression and political 
activity so that a government with some claim to legitimacy can 


227 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


be established, one that can proceed to make a political settle¬ 
ment with the National Liberation Front. Despite the outra¬ 
geous suppression of Buddhist political activity, the Buddhists 
still appear to be confident, as they have been for years, that 
they can function effectively in cooperation with the NLF. The 
recent “Policy Statement” published by the Overseas Vietna¬ 
mese Buddhist Association emphasizes this (as does the touch¬ 
ing and pathetic book by Thich Nhat Hanh, Vietnam: Lotus in 
a Sea of Fire) y and, in fact, puts forth a program for South 
Vietnam that is not markedly different from that of the NLF. 

American authorities have repeatedly indicated that they 
share this assessment of the Saigon government and its popular 
base. Both the present Assistant Secretary of State for Far East¬ 
ern Affairs and his predecessor have expressed their belief that 
neutralization of South Vietnam would lead to a Communist 
takeover, and it is widely admitted that the American expedi¬ 
tionary force was introduced to stave off what was in essence a 
political defeat. In his revealing study of the Vietcong, Ameri¬ 
can foreign service officer Douglas Pike concludes, with ample 
evidence, that the NLF victory in the now long-forgotten civil 
war was essentially a political and organizational victory, 
achieved by building a mass movement. The NLF, he states, is 
the only “truly mass-based political party in South Vietnam.” 
Only the Buddhists—whose political organization was smashed 
in the spring of 1966—could realistically hope to take part in a 
coalition with the NLF, in his judgment. General Richard Stil- 
well, at the time second in command in the Southeast Asian 
theater, informed Senator Young that we are putting down “an 
insurrection,” and even General Westmoreland, who now as¬ 
serts that he has seen no signs of insurrection, admitted to 
Senator Young that the majority of the Vietcong fighting in the 
Mekong Delta were born and reared there 9 —thus indicating that 


228 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


he may not know the meaning of the word “insurrection.” 

The basis for the success of the insurrection is not very ob¬ 
scure. Denis Warner, as anti-Communist as any newsman who 
has worked in Southeast Asia, pointed out years ago that “in 
hundreds of villages all over South-East Asia the only people 
working at the grass roots for an uplift in people's living stand¬ 
ards are the Communists.” 10 And to the Communist agit-prop 
successes, the Americans have contributed mightily, for ex* 
ample, with the terroristic bombing policy. American sources 
indicate that in the first year of American bombing of the South, 
1965, local recruitment for the Vietcong tripled. 11 The head of 
the Saigon office of Asahi Shimbun concludes that “It is certain 
that the escalation and spread of the war, even though its re¬ 
sults may be advantageous to the Saigon Government itself, only 
serves to heighten still further opposition to the war among the 
general population,” adding that “The number of draft-dodgers 
and deserters among young South Vietnamese is a sign of the 
failure of the war, by and large, to win the support of young 
people, who tend to view it as an American war.” 12 And the 
situation can only worsen. Saigon authorities indicate that there 
are now some two million refugees, most of them, according to 
the reports of war correspondents, victims of American bom¬ 
bardment or forced resettlement. An Associated Press report 
from Saigon gives the following shattering forecast: 

The United States high command, preoccupied for two years with 
hunting down North Vietnamese regulars, now is looking more 
toward the populated valleys and lowlands where the enemy 
wields potent political influence and gets his sustenance. Quick 
gains are hoped for by forced resettlement of chronically Com¬ 
munist areas, followed up with scorched-earth operations that 
deny enemy troops all food, shelter, and material support. Cen¬ 
tral highlands valleys are being denuded of all living things; people 
ringing the Communist war zones in the South have been moved. 

229 


■ft - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

Some American observers recently in the Mekong Delta say that 

the Vietnamese Army, long hated and feared, now is regarded as 

less of a threat to the countryside than the Americans. 13 

Dozens of such reports can be cited. Those who advocate 
