spondingly, almost any policy is more rational than one that 
accepts repeated risk of nuclear war, hence a near guarantee of 
nuclear war in the long run—a “long run” that is unlikely to be 
very long, given the risks that policy makers are willing to 
accept. Thus in the Cuban missile crisis, Kennedy was willing 
(according to Sorensen’s memoirs) to accept a probability of 


163 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


Vz to y 2 of nuclear war, in order to establish that the United 
States alone has the right to maintain missiles on the borders of 
a potential enemy. 6 And who knows what “probabilities” the 
CIA is now providing to the Rostows and the Wheelers who are 
trying to save something from their Vietnam fiasco by bombing 
at the Chinese border? Furthermore, it does not require an 
unusual political intelligence to urge world-wide de-escalation 
on the great power that by any objective standard is the most 
aggressive in the world—as measured by the number of gov¬ 
ernments maintained by force or subverted by intrigue, by 
troops and bases on foreign soil, by willingness to use the most 
awesome “killing machine” in history to enforce its concept of 
world order. 

It would be more enlightening to consider the program of 
revolutionary pacifism in the context of a decade ago, when 
international gangsterism was more widely distributed, with the 
British engaged in murderous repression in Kenya, the French 
fighting the last of their dirty colonial wars, and the Soviet 
Union consolidating its Eastern European empire with brutality 
and deceit. But it is the international situation of December 
1941 that provides the most severe test for Muste’s doctrine. 
There is a great deal to be learned from a study of the events 
that led up to an armed attack, by a competing imperialism, on 
American possessions and the forces defending them, and even 
more from a consideration of the varying reactions to these 
events and their aftermath. If Muste’s revolutionary pacifism is 
defensible as a general political program, then it must be defen¬ 
sible in these extreme circumstances. By arguing that it was, 
Muste isolated himself not only from any mass base, but also 
from all but a marginal fringe of American intellectuals. 

Writing in 1941, Muste saw the war as 


164 


The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


a conflict between two groups of powers for survival and domina¬ 
tion. One set of powers, which includes Britain and the United 
States, and perhaps “free” France, controls some 70% of the 
earth’s resources and thirty million square miles of territory. The 
imperialistic status quo thus to their advantage was achieved by a 
series of wars including the last one. All they ask now is to be left 
at peace, and if so they are disposed to make their rule mild 
though firm. ... On the other hand stands a group of powers, such 
as Germany, Italy, Hungary, Japan, controlling about 15% of 
the earth’s resources and one million square miles of territory, 
equally determined to alter the situation in their own favor, to 
impose their ideas of “order,” and armed to the teeth to do that, 
even if it means plunging the whole world into war. 7 

He foresaw that an Allied victory would yield “a new American 
empire” incorporating a subservient Britain, “that we shall be 
the next nation to seek world domination—in other words, to do 
what we condemn Hitler for trying to do.” In the disordered 
postwar world, we shall be told, he predicts, that “our only 
safety lies in making or keeping ourselves ‘impregnable.’ But 
that . . . means being able to decide by preponderance of mili¬ 
tary might any international issue that may arise—which would 
put us in the position in which Hitler is trying to put Germany.” 
In a later essay, he quotes this remark: “The problem after a 
war is with the victor. He thinks he has just proved that war 
and violence pay. Who will now teach him a lesson?” 8 

The prediction that the United States would emerge as the 
world-dominant power was political realism; to forecast that it 
would act accordingly, having achieved this status by force, was 
no less realistic. This tragedy might be averted, Muste urged, 
by a serious attempt at peaceful reconciliation with no attempt 
to fasten sole war-guilt on any nation, assurance to all peoples 
of equitable access to markets and essential materials, arma¬ 
ment reduction, massive economic rehabilitation, and moves 
towards international federation. To the American ideologist of 


165 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 
