may have the pleasure of governing them.” 37 And our own 
John Hay in 1898 outlined “a partnership in beneficence” which 
would bring freedom and civilization to Cuba, Hawaii, and the 
Philippines, just as the Pax Britannica had brought these bene- 


58 



Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


fits to India, Egypt, and South Africa. 38 But although the 
benevolence of imperialism is a familiar refrain, the idea that 
the issue of benevolence is irrelevant, an improper, sentimental 
consideration, is something of an innovation in imperialist 
rhetoric, a contribution of the sort one might perhaps expect 
from “the new mandarins” whose claim to power is based on 
knowledge and technique. 

Going a step beyond, notice how perverse is the entire dis¬ 
cussion of the “conceptual framework” for counterinsurgency. 
The idea that we must choose between the method of “winning 
hearts and minds” and the method of shaping behavior pre¬ 
sumes that we have the right to choose at all. This is to grant us 
a right that we would surely accord to no other world power. 
Yet the overwhelming body of American scholarship accords us 
this right. For example, William Henderson, formerly associate 
executive director and Far Eastern specialist for the Council on 
Foreign Relations, proposes that we must “prosecute a construc¬ 
tive, manipulative diplomacy” in order to deal with “internal 
subversion, particularly in the form of Communist-instigated 
guerrilla warfare or insurgency”—“internal aggression,” as he 
calls it, in accordance with contemporary usage. 39 Our “historic 
tasks,” he proclaims, are “nothing less than to assist purpose¬ 
fully and constructively in the processes of modern nation 
building in Southeast Asia, to deflect the course of a funda¬ 
mental revolution into channels compatible with the long range 
interests of the United States.” It is understood that true “nation 
building” is that path of development compatible with our in¬ 
terests; hence there is no difficulty in pursuing these historic 
tasks in concert. There are, however, two real stumbling-blocks 
in the way of the required manipulative diplomacy. The first is 
“a great psychological barrier.” We must learn to abandon “old 
dogma” and pursue a “new diplomacy” that is “frankly inter- 


59 

