the Vietnamese from their American saviours.” 61 The IVS 
group paints a grim picture of the consequences of our military 
intervention in Vietnam, in terms that are not unfamiliar to 
readers of the American press. Their resignation was intended 
as a protest against policies which, they predict, can only serve 
to drive still more of the population into association with the 
NLF. They assert that our “commitment” in Vietnam has al¬ 
ways been to one element of Vietnamese society, “the urban- 
educated group, which has felt that a noncommunist, inde¬ 
pendent government would best serve their interests and the 
interests of their compatriots in the rural villages of South Viet¬ 
nam.” That we had a right to make such a commitment and to 
act on it is not questioned in their statement. The “tragedy 
unfolding in Vietnam” to which Senator Morton refers is that 
we were unable to realize this commitment, to construct a 
stable government that would represent the interests of the 
Vietnamese, as these interests are interpreted by “the urban- 
educated group.” 

No one would question the sincerity or dedication of the IVS 
leaders, or their undoubted contributions in their work in South 
Vietnam. But there is every reason to question their assumption 
that we have the right to restructure and organize South Viet¬ 
namese society, by force if necessary (their resignation came in 
the fall of 1967), along lines that we have set. In essence, their 
position is not different from that of Lord Cornwallis, whose 
“permanent settlement” in India in 1793 restructured village 
society, creating a landed aristocracy on the British pattern. 


251 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


There is no reason to doubt the sincerity of his belief that this 
civilized arrangement could only benefit the Indians in the long 
run. Of course, the new squirearchy also happened to serve 
British interests; as the British Governor-General Lord William 
Bentinck put it: “If security was wanting against popular 
tumult or revolution, I should say that the 'permanent settle¬ 
ment’ . . . has this great advantage ... of having created a vast 
body of rich landed proprietors deeply interested in the con¬ 
tinuance of British Dominion and having complete command 
over the mass of the people” (1829). Our reasons for wanting to 
control Vietnam are not those of the British in India in 1829, but 
in Vietnam, as in the Philippines and Latin America, our efforts 
are directed to organizing (or restructuring) the society so as to 
ensure the domination of those elements that will enter into 
partnership with us. That we should do so is not surprising, 
surely not to anyone who is familiar with the history of impe¬ 
rialism. What is extraordinary is that at this late date we should 
act with so little awareness of what we are doing, that we still 
find it possible to deceive ourselves, though few others, 62 with 
the classical rhetoric of long-decayed imperialism. 

Before continuing with this sketch of American reactions to 
the war in Vietnam, I would like to cite another American 
military source, which gives much insight into the nature of the 
Vietcong success in the face of the titanic military force with 
which we have attempted to batter it to the ground: 

The success of this unique system of war depends upon almost 
complete unity of action of the entire native population. That 
such unity is a fact is too obvious to admit of discussion; how it 
is brought about and maintained is not so plain. Intimidation has 
undoubtedly accomplished much to this end, but fear as the only 
motive is hardly sufficient to account for the united and appar¬ 
ently spontaneous action of several millions of people. One traitor 
252 



The Logic of Withdrawal 


in each town would effectually destroy such a complex organiza¬ 
tion. 

This assessment is from a United States War Department 
report, in the year 1900; the author is Major General Arthur 
MacArthur, and he is commenting, of course, on the campaign 
to suppress the Philippine war of national liberation, then ac¬ 
tively in progress. These remarks are perfectly apropos today. I 
quote them to dispel the thought that Vietnam is merely a 
unique aberration, a blunder, merely a result of “the politics of 
inadvertence,” without roots in our history and without signifi¬ 
cance for the future. 

There is of course a sense in which the liberal critics are correct 
when they refer to the Vietnam war as an “aberration.” In Viet¬ 
nam, we lost control. The Vietnamese refused to play the game 
the way they were expected to when the war was simulated on 
the RAND Corporation computers. They did not realize that 
they were supposed to yield when the pressure reached a certain 
point. Therefore, we were forced to escalate beyond any reason¬ 
