“costly,” both to the government and to the “pragmatic middle 
classes.” Let us make the matter concrete. Draft resistance is, 
for the moment, strongest among the students at the best uni¬ 
versities. Last month, for example, 320 law school students and 
several hundred students at Yale signed “We Won’t Go” state¬ 
ments. The government will soon have to decide whether to 
draft graduate students. If the resistance continues to grow, the 
decision will be a costly one, no matter how it is made. It is 
politically difficult to give students a blanket exemption, for 
obvious reasons. On the other hand, an attempt to draft stu¬ 
dents will, if resistance develops, put the government in the 
position of tolerating an open violation of the law or of carrying 
out serious punitive acts against the children of the social and 
economic elite. One of the costs of the war is the contempt for 
the government, for its violence and mendacity, felt by many 
young people. Punishment of resisters will deepen this disaffec¬ 
tion, and may channel it in new directions. Involvement of 
adults in support of resisters increases the costs still more. If we 
look beyond Vietnam, the costs may be greater still, not only 


391 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


because of the unpredictable effects of a really large-scale re¬ 
pression of those who are expected to run the society in the 
coming years, but also because of the “danger” inherent in the 
fact that a citizen dares to ask whether he should mechanically 
obey, that he raises questions about the range of meaningful 
political action. 

There are several ways in which one can hope to affect the 
decisions made by the government. One way is to try to influ¬ 
ence the choice that will be offered by the two major political 
parties and to exercise this choice on Election Day. Another, 
very different approach is to try to modify the objective condi¬ 
tions that any elected official must consider when he selects a 
course of action. I do not want to go into the general question 
of the legitimacy of these alternatives, but rather to make two 
points. First, those who are committed to the first method will 
naturally regard political action of the latter sort—draft resist¬ 
ance, for example—as a danger, whose cost they must seek to 
reduce. Secondly, to be realistic, the parliamentary system at 
the moment offers almost no opportunity for meaningful action 
on such issues as Vietnam. One cannot be certain, of course. 
