established control by force, and in August 1932 the Japanese 
government, under strong military and popular pressure, recog¬ 
nized Manchuria as the new, “independent” state of Man- 
chukuo, under the former Manchu emperor, Pu Yi. As Walter 
Lippmann commented, the procedure of setting up “local Chi¬ 
nese governments which are dependent upon Japan” was “a 
familiar one,” not unlike the American precedents “in Nic¬ 
aragua, Haiti, and elsewhere.” 23 

The Manchurian events flowed over into China proper and 
Japan itself, and caused an international crisis. The boycott in 
Shanghai and a clash between Chinese troops and Japanese 
marines near the Japanese sector of the international settlement 
led to a retaliatory aerial bombardment by the Japanese. “This 
indiscriminate use of air power against a small contingent of 
Chinese soldiers dispersed among a congested civilian popula¬ 
tion generated a profound sense of shock and indignation in 
England and the United States .” 24 In Japan, the Shanghai inci¬ 
dent was seen rather differently. The Japanese minister to 
China at the time, Mamoru Shigemitsu, writes in his memoirs 25 
that he was responsible for the request that the government 
dispatch troops to Shanghai “to save the Japanese residents 
from annihilation.” In his view, the thirty thousand Japanese 


176 



The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


settlers and the Japanese property in Shanghai were at the 
mercy of the Chinese army, with its rather left-wing tendencies. 
Furthermore, “Chinese Communists” were starting strikes in 
Japanese-owned mills. For all of these reasons, Shigemitsu felt 
justified in requesting troops, which “succeeded in dislodging 
the Chinese forces from the Shanghai district and restoring law 
and order”—a “familiar procedure,” as Lippmann rightly ob¬ 
served, and not without present-day parallels. 26 

As far as Japan itself is concerned, the events of 1931-1932 
were quite serious in their impact. According to the outstanding 
Japanese political scientist Masao Maruyama, “the energy of 
radical fascism stored up in the preparatory period now burst 
forth in full concentration under the combined pressure of 
domestic panic and international crises such as the Manchurian 
Incident, the Shanghai Incident, and Japan’s withdrawal from 
the League of Nations.” 27 Furthermore, “the issue of the in¬ 
fringement of the supreme command,” raised when the civilian 
