interest of the United States,” which must serve as the “single 
standard” against which any step in policy making must be 
tested, is “to establish that American military power, once 
committed to defend another nation, cannot be driven from the 
field”—even if, as in the case in question, an American with¬ 
drawal would be in the face of an “enemy” that is largely in¬ 
digenous. 70 If we generalize this “bedrock vital interest” to 
other great powers, the outlook for the future is dim. The Soviet 
Union, for example, could have used this argument to justify its 
military intervention in Hungary (in support of what it re¬ 
garded as the legitimate government, against rebels incited 
from the outside and including fascist elements, etc.), or to 


259 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


maintain its missiles in Cuba (there to defend against American 
invasion), in which case we would not now be discussing Viet¬ 
nam or anything else. 

Still more interesting, however, is the second argument: that 
we must protect Asia from dominion or conquest by a hostile 
power. I will not dwell on the fact that all reputable authorities 
agree that the Vietnamese are strongly anti-Chinese, 71 so that if 
we were really interested in containing Chinese expansionism, 
we should presumably be supporting Ho Chi Minh, along with 
all popular, indigenous forces on the border of China, whatever 
their domestic character. What seems to me most revealing, 
however, is the reason that Goodwin cites as underlying our 
commitment to protect Asia from outside force. It is “the almost 
idealistic, compelling conviction that the one nation with the 
power to prevent it should not stand aside while nations unwill¬ 
ingly submit to foreign domination.” Thus we must not “un¬ 
dermine the central world purpose of the United States—the 
creation of an international order of independent states.” It 
does not occur to him that by suppressing a victorious insurrec¬ 
tion, we are precisely undermining this “central world purpose” 
and forcing a nation to “submit to foreign domination.” Nor 
does he take note of the fact that we are unable to form a 
puppet government with even the legitimacy of those set up by 
Germany and Japan—we have not, for example, been able to 
find a national figure of the stature of Petain or Wang Ching- 
wei to mask our aggression. This sentimental faith in American 
