
ist powers. Manchuria remained independent of the Kuo- 
mintang, but Chinese Nationalist pressures for unification were 
increasing. At the same time, the Soviet Union had significantly 
expanded its military power on the Manchurian border, a fact 
that could not fail to concern the Japanese military. Japan had a 
substantial investment in the South Manchurian Railway and, 
rightly or wrongly, regarded Manchuria as an extremely impor¬ 
tant potential source of desperately needed raw materials. 
Large numbers of Japanese 19 as well as thousands of Korean 
farmers encouraged by Japan had settled in Manchuria, inflam¬ 
ing Chinese nationalism and, simultaneously, deepening the 
commitment of the Kwantung Army in Manchuria to “preserve 
order.” The future of the South Manchurian Railway—and with 
it, the associated investments as well as the welfare of the Japa¬ 
nese and Korean immigrants and residents—was very much in 
doubt, as Chinese pressures mounted both inside Manchuria 
and in Nationalist China. “Technically, under a 1905 protocol, 
China was barred from building any railway lines parallel to 
the South Manchurian Railway or from constructing any lines 
which might endanger the commercial traffic along it/’ 20 but 
China was quite naturally disinclined to honor this provision, 
and Japanese attempts to conduct discussions on railroad con¬ 
struction were frustrated, as the Kuomintang pursued its course 
of attempting to incorporate Manchuria within China and to 
eliminate Japanese influence, no doubt with the support of the 
majority of the Manchurian population. A number of fairly 
serious incidents of violence occurred involving Korean settlers 
and the Japanese military. A Japanese officer was murdered in 
the summer of 1931. In Shanghai, a boycott of Japanese goods 
was initiated. 

Under these conditions, debate intensified within Japan as to 
whether its future lay in “the political leadership of an East Asia 


175 


+ - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

power bloc” guaranteed by military force, or in continuing to 
abide by “the new rules of diplomacy established by Occidental 
and satiated powers.” 21 The issue was resolved in September 
1931, when Kwantung Army officers provoked a clash with 
Chinese forces (the “Mukden incident”) and proceeded to take 
full control of Manchuria. China, not unexpectedly, refused the 
Japanese offers to negotiate, insisting that “evacuation is a pre¬ 
condition of direct negotiation.” 22 Exercising the right of “self- 
defense” against Chinese “bandits,” the Kwantung Army 
established control by force, and in August 1932 the Japanese 
government, under strong military and popular pressure, recog¬ 
nized Manchuria as the new, “independent” state of Man- 
chukuo, under the former Manchu emperor, Pu Yi. As Walter 
Lippmann commented, the procedure of setting up “local Chi¬ 
nese governments which are dependent upon Japan” was “a 
familiar one,” not unlike the American precedents “in Nic¬ 
aragua, Haiti, and elsewhere.” 23 

The Manchurian events flowed over into China proper and 
Japan itself, and caused an international crisis. The boycott in 
Shanghai and a clash between Chinese troops and Japanese 
marines near the Japanese sector of the international settlement 
led to a retaliatory aerial bombardment by the Japanese. “This 
indiscriminate use of air power against a small contingent of 
Chinese soldiers dispersed among a congested civilian popula¬ 
tion generated a profound sense of shock and indignation in 
England and the United States .” 24 In Japan, the Shanghai inci¬ 
dent was seen rather differently. The Japanese minister to 
China at the time, Mamoru Shigemitsu, writes in his memoirs 25 
that he was responsible for the request that the government 
dispatch troops to Shanghai “to save the Japanese residents 
from annihilation.” In his view, the thirty thousand Japanese 


176 



The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


settlers and the Japanese property in Shanghai were at the 
mercy of the Chinese army, with its rather left-wing tendencies. 
Furthermore, “Chinese Communists” were starting strikes in 
Japanese-owned mills. For all of these reasons, Shigemitsu felt 
justified in requesting troops, which “succeeded in dislodging 
the Chinese forces from the Shanghai district and restoring law 
and order”—a “familiar procedure,” as Lippmann rightly ob¬ 
served, and not without present-day parallels. 26 

As far as Japan itself is concerned, the events of 1931-1932 
were quite serious in their impact. According to the outstanding 
Japanese political scientist Masao Maruyama, “the energy of 
radical fascism stored up in the preparatory period now burst 
forth in full concentration under the combined pressure of 
domestic panic and international crises such as the Manchurian 
Incident, the Shanghai Incident, and Japan’s withdrawal from 
the League of Nations.” 27 Furthermore, “the issue of the in¬ 
fringement of the supreme command,” raised when the civilian 
