ance from the Western imperialist powers. Japan was bogged 


194 


The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


down in an unwinnable war on the Asian mainland. The policy 
of “crushing blow—generous peace” was failing, because of the 
foreign support for the “local authority” of Chiang Kai-shek, 
while Japan’s real enemy, the Soviet Union, was expanding its 
economic and military power. 74 How familiar it all sounds. 

With all of the talk about benevolence and generosity, it is 
doubtful that Japanese spokesmen ever surpassed the level of 
fatuity that characterizes much of American scholarship, which 
often seems mired in the rhetoric of a Fourth of July address. 
For example, Willard Thorp describes American policy in these 
terms: “. . . we do not believe in exploitation, piracy, imperial¬ 
ism or war-mongering. In fact, we have used our wealth to help 
other countries and our military strength to defend the inde¬ 
pendence of small nations” 75 (in the manner indicated in note 
62, for example). Many similar remarks might be cited, but it is 
depressing to continue. 

A wave of revulsion swept through the world as the brutality 
of the Japanese attack on China became known. When notified 
of the intention of the Japanese government to bomb Nanking, 
the United States responded as follows: “The Government is of 
the opinion that any bombardment of an extensive zone con¬ 
taining a sizeable population engaged in their peaceful pursuits 
is inadmissible and runs counter to the principles of law and 
humanity.” 76 Now that these principles have been repealed, it 
is difficult to recapture the feeling of horror at the events them¬ 
selves and of contempt for those who had perpetrated them. 
For an American today to describe these events in the manner 
they deserve would be the ultimate in hypocrisy. For this rea¬ 
son I will say very little about them. 

In Manchuria, the Japanese conducted a fairly successful 
counterinsurgency operation, beginning in 1931. 77 The record 
is instructive. In 1932, 


195 



