substitute words for acts while concentrating upon domestic 
issues.” Still, we cannot be certain of this and must therefore 
continue our efforts to tame the dragon. One of the gravest 
problems posed by China is its policy of “isolationist fanaticism” 
—obviously, a serious threat to peace. Another danger is the 

33 


*= AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

terrifying figure of Mao Tse-tung, a romantic, who refuses to 
accept the “bureaucratism essential to the ordering of this 
enormously complex, extremely difficult society.” The moder¬ 
ate scholars would feel much more at ease with the familiar sort 
of technical expert, who is committed to the “triumph of bu¬ 
reaucratism” and who refrains from romantic efforts to under¬ 
mine the party apparatus and the discipline it imposes. 

Furthermore, the moderate scholars announce their support 
for “our basic position” in Vietnam. A Communist victory in 
Vietnam, they argue, would “gravely jeopardize the possibilities 
for a political equilibrium in Asia, seriously damage our credi¬ 
bility, deeply affect the morale—and the policies—of our Asian 
allies and the neutrals.” By a “political equilibrium,” they do 
not, of course, refer to the status quo as of 1945-1946 or as 
outlined by international agreement at Geneva in 1954. They do 
not explain why the credibility of the United States is more 
important than the credibility of the indigenous elements 
in Vietnam who have dedicated themselves to a war of national 
liberation. Nor do they explain why the morale of the military 
dictatorships of Thailand and Taiwan must be preserved. They 
merely hint darkly of the dangers of a third world war, dangers 
which are real enough and which are increased when advocates 
of revolutionary change face an external counterrevolutionary 
force. In principle, such dangers can be lessened by damping 
revolutionary ardor or by withdrawing the counterrevolutionary 
force. The latter alternative, however, is unthinkable, irrespon¬ 
sible. 

The crucial assumption in the program of the moderate 
scholars is that we must not encourage “those elements com¬ 
mitted to the thesis that violence is the best means of effecting 
change.” It is important to recognize that it is not violence as 
such to which the moderate scholars object. On the contrary, 


34 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


they approve of our violence in Vietnam, which, as they are 
well aware, enormously exceeds that of the Vietnamese enemy. 
To further underline this point, they cite as our greatest tri¬ 
umph in Southeast Asia the “dramatic changes” which have 
taken place in Indonesia—the most dramatic being the mas¬ 
sacre of several hundred thousand people. But this massacre, 
like our extermination of Vietnamese, is not a use of violence to 
effect social change and is therefore legitimate. What is more, it 
may be that those massacred were largely ethnic Chinese and 
landless peasants, and that the “countercoup” in effect re-estab¬ 
lished traditional authority more firmly. 19 If so, all the more 
reason why we should not deplore this use of violence; and in 
fact, the moderate scholars delicately refrain from alluding to it 
in their discussion of dramatic changes in Indonesia. We must 
conclude that when these scholars deplore the use of violence to 
effect change, it is not the violence but rather steps toward social 
change that they find truly disturbing. Social change that de¬ 
parts from the course we plot is not to be tolerated. The threat 
to order is too great. 

So great is the importance of stability and order that even 
reform of the sort that receives American authorization must 
often be delayed, the moderate scholars emphasize. “Indeed, 
many types of reform increase instability, however desirable 
and essential they may be in long-range terms. For people 
under siege, there is no substitute for security.” The reference, 
needless to say, is not to security from American bombardment, 
but rather to security from the wrong sorts of political and 
social change. 

The policy recommendations of the moderate scholars are 
based on their particular ideological bias, namely, that a certain 
form of stability—not that of North Vietnam or North Korea, 
but that of Thailand, Taiwan, or the Philippines—is so essential 


35 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


that we must be willing to use our unparalleled means of vio¬ 
lence to ensure that it is preserved. It is instructive to see how 
other mentors of the new mandarins describe the problem of 
