

336 



The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


ment Printing Office is an endless source of insight into the 
moral and intellectual level of this expert advice. In its publica¬ 
tions one can read, for example, the testimony of Professor 
David N. Rowe, director of graduate studies in international 
relations at Yale University, before the House Committee on 
Foreign Affairs (see note 15). Professor Rowe proposes (p. 
266) that the United States buy all surplus Canadian and Aus¬ 
tralian wheat, so that there will be mass starvation in China. 
These are his words: “Mind you, I am not talking about this as 
a weapon against the Chinese people. It will be. But that is only 
incidental. The weapon will be a weapon against the Govern¬ 
ment because the internal stability of that country cannot be 
sustained by an unfriendly Government in the face of general 
starvation.” Professor Rowe will have none of the sentimental 
moralism that might lead one to compare this suggestion with, 
say, the Ostpolitik of Hitler's Germany. 24 Nor does he fear the 
impact of such policies on other Asian nations, for example 
Japan. He assures us, from his “very long acquaintance with 
Japanese questions,” that “the Japanese above all are people who 
respect power and determination.” Hence “they will not be so 
much alarmed by American policy in Vietnam that takes off 
from a position of power and intends to seek a solution based 
upon the imposition of our power upon local people that we are 
in opposition to.” What would disturb the Japanese is “a policy 
of indecision, a policy of refusal to face up to the problems [in 
China and Vietnam] and to meet our responsibilities there in a 
positive way,” such as the way just cited. A conviction that we 
were “unwilling to use the power that they know we have” 
might “alarm the Japanese people very intensely and shake the 
degree of their friendly relations with us.” In fact, a full use of 
American power would be particularly reassuring to the Japa¬ 
nese, because they have had a demonstration “of the tremen- 


337 


yr - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

dous power in action of the United States . . . because they have 
felt our power directly.” This is surely a prime example of the 
