the Western powers. 30 

This policy was in conflict with Chinese nationalism and with 
the long-term insistence of the United States on the Open Door 
policy in China. 


179 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


From 1928 there had been an increasing divergence between 
the policies of the civilian Japanese governments, which at¬ 
tempted to play the game of international politics in accordance 
with the rules set by the dominant imperialist powers, and the 
Kwantung Army, which regarded these rules as unfair to Japan 
and was also dissatisfied with the injustice of domestic Japanese 
society. The independent initiative of the Kwantung Army was 
largely that of the young officers of petit-bourgeois origin who 
felt that they represented as well the interests of the soldiers, 
predominantly of peasant stock. “The Manchurian affair consti¬ 
tutes an external expression of the radical reform movement 
that was originally inspired by Kita and Okawa,” 31 who had 
developed the view that Japan represented an “international 
proletariat,” with an emancipating mission for the Asian masses, 
and who opposed the obvious inequities of modern capitalism. 
The fundamental law proposed for Manchukuo, in 1932, pro¬ 
tected the people from “usury, excessive profit, and all other 
unjust economic pressure.” As Ogata notes, 32 the fundamental 
law “showed the attempt to forestall the modern forms of eco¬ 
nomic injustice caused by capitalism.” In Japan itself, this pro¬ 
gram appealed to the Social Democrats, who blamed “Chinese 
warlords and selfish Japanese capitalists for the difficulties in 
[Manchuria]” and who demanded “the creation of a socialistic 
system in Manchuria, one that would benefit ‘both Chinese and 
Japanese living in Manchuria/ ” 33 

Ogata cites a great deal of evidence to support the conclusion 
that the Kwantung Army never expected to establish Japanese 
supremacy, but rather proposed to leave “wide discretion to the 
local self-governing Chinese bodies, and intended neither the 
disruption of the daily lives of the Manchurian people nor their 
assimilation into Japanese culture” (p. 182). The program for 
autonomy was apparently influenced by and attempted to in- 


iso 


The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


corporate certain indigenous Chinese moves towards autonomy. 
“In the period immediately preceding the Manchurian Affair, a 
group of Chinese under the leadership of Chang Ku also at¬ 
tempted to create an autonomous Manchuria based on coopera¬ 
tion of its six largest ethnic groups (Japanese, Chinese, 
Russians, Mongolians, Koreans, and Manchurians) in order to 
protect the area from Japanese, Chinese and Soviet encroach¬ 
ment” (p. 40). The governing bodies set up by the Kwantung 
Army 

were led by prominent Chinese with Japanese support. Reorgani¬ 
zation of local administrative organs was undertaken by utilizing 
the traditional self-governing bodies. . . . Yu Chung-han, a prom¬ 
inent elder statesman of the Mukden Government, . . . was . . . 
installed as chief of the Self-Government Guiding Board on No¬ 
vember 10. Yu had been the leader of the civilian group in 
Manchuria w r hich, in contrast to the warlords, had held to the 
principle of absolute hokyo anmin (secure boundary and peace¬ 
ful life). According to him, the protection and prosperity of the 
Northeastern Provinces assumed priority over all, including the 
relationship with China proper. Through tax reform, improve¬ 
ment of the wage system of government officials, and abolition of 
a costly army, the people in Manchuria were to enjoy the benefits 
of peaceful labor, while defense was to be entrusted to their most 
powerful neighbor, Japan. [Pp. 118-19] 

In general, the Kwantung Army regarded the thirty million 
people of Manchuria—half of whom had immigrated since the 
initiation of Japanese development efforts a quarter of a cen¬ 
tury earlier—as “suffering masses who had been sacrificed to 
the misrule of warlords and the avarice of wicked officials, 
masses deriving no benefits of civilization despite the natural 
abundance of the region .” 34 Furthermore, the Army regarded 
Manchuria as “the fortress against Russian southern advance¬ 
ment, which became increasingly threatening as Soviet influ¬ 
ence over the Chinese revolution became more and more ap- 


181 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


