gone hand in hand with national sovereignty. Today both nations 
stand in the forefront of world efforts to promote and defend the 
democratic way of life.” 

42. In an article on “U.S.-Thai links” in the Christian Science Moni¬ 
tor, October 14, 1967. 

43. Just a few paragraphs earlier we read that in the postwar period 
“the Americans rapidly expanded the Thai armed forces from 50,000 
to 100,000 men . . . the United States quickly increased the police 
forces, and this helped suppress opponents of the government. The 
technical assistance program was largely converted to military objec¬ 
tives. The internal impact of this policy further strengthened the power 
and prestige of the Thai military leaders who had seized the govern¬ 
ment in 1947. The effort to move toward some form of constitutional 
rule was halted, and the democratic institutions inaugurated by civil¬ 
ian leaders just after the war were abolished. Political parties were 
suppressed. The press was censored. Power became increasingly cen¬ 
tralized in the hands of a few military leaders.” All of this, however, 
did not constitute “interference in the domestic affairs of other na¬ 
tions,” and is not “contrary to American traditions.” 


134 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


44. Western Interests in the Pacific Realm (New York, Random 
House, 1967). 

45. Of what importance, then, is the fact that the overwhelming major¬ 
ity of Okinawans, including 80% of those whose businesses would be 
impaired or destroyed by this move, want the island returned to Japan, 
according to the Asahi polls (see Japan Quarterly, Vol. 15 [January- 
March 1968], pp. 42-52)? As to the “strategic trust territories,” 
Adam says, we must also not become overly sentimental: “A strategic 
trust is based on the assumption of the overriding importance of 
national defense and the preservation of world order as against the 
cultural and political freedom of the indigenous inhabitants.” 

46. H. D. Malaviya, quoted in Clairmonte {op. cit., p. 114), who 
cites substantial evidence in support of the following evaluation of the 
consequences of Western dominance: “The systematic destruction of 
Indian manufacturers; the creation of the Zemindari [landed aristoc¬ 
racy] and its parasitical outgrowths; the changes in agrarian structure; 
the financial losses incurred by tribute; the sharp transition from a pre¬ 
monetised economy to one governed by the international price mecha¬ 
nism—these were some of the social and institutional forces that were 
