
INTRODUCTION 


Three years have passed since American intervention in a civil 
war in Vietnam was converted into a colonial war of the classic 
type. This was the decision of a liberal American administra¬ 
tion. Like the earlier steps to enforce our will in Vietnam, it was 
taken with the support of leading political figures, intellectuals, 
and academic experts, many of whom now oppose the war 
because they do not believe that American repression can suc¬ 
ceed in Vietnam and therefore urge, on pragmatic grounds, 
that we “take our stand” where the prospects are more hopeful. 
If the resistance in Vietnam were to collapse, if the situation 
were to revert to that of Thailand or Guatemala or Greece, 
where the forces of order, with our approval and assistance, are 
exercising a fair degree of control, then this opposition to the 
Vietnam war would also cease; in the words of one such 
spokesman, we might then “all be saluting the wisdom and 
statesmanship of the American government .” 1 If we are forced 
to liquidate this enterprise—in one of the two possible ways— 


a 







★ - 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


the liberal ideologists will continue to urge that we organize 
and control as extensive a dominion as is feasible in what they 
take to be “our national interest” and in the interest of the 
elements in other societies that we designate as fit to rule. 

As matters now stand, it appears unlikely that Vietnamese 
resistance will collapse. The United States seems unable to 
muster the military force to crush this resistance and to guaran¬ 
tee the dominance of the government and social institutions 
that we have determined to be appropriate. There is, therefore, 
some hope that American troops will be withdrawn and the 
Vietnamese left to try to reconstruct something from the wreck¬ 
age. The course of history may be determined, to a very signifi¬ 
cant degree, by what the people of the United States will have 
learned from this catastrophe. 

Three times in a generation American technology has laid 
waste a helpless Asian country. In 1945 this was done with a 
sense of moral rectitude that was, and remains, almost unchal¬ 
lenged. In Korea, there were a few qualms. The amazing resist¬ 
ance of the Vietnamese has finally forced us to ask, What have 
we done? There are, at last, some signs of awakening to the 
horrifying reality. Resistance to American violence and to the 
militarization of our own society has become, if not a significant 
force, at least a detectable one. There is hope that the struggle 
against racism and exploitation at home can be linked with the 
struggle to remove the heavy Yankee boot from the necks of 
oppressed people throughout the world. 

Twenty years of intensive cold-war indoctrination and sev¬ 
enty years of myth regarding our international role make it 
difficult to face these issues in a serious way. There is a great 
deal of intellectual debris to be cleared away. Ideological pres¬ 
sures so overpowering that even their existence was denied 
must be examined and understood. The search for alternatives, 


4 



Introduction 


for individuals, for American society, for the international order 
as a whole, has barely begun, and no one can guess where it 
will lead. Quite possibly it will lead nowhere, cut off by domes¬ 
tic repression or its “functional equivalent,” to use a favorite 
term of the present administration: the dominance of a liberal 
technocracy who will serve the existing social order in the belief 
that they represent justice and humanity, fighting limited wars 
at home and overseas to preserve stability, promising that the 
future will be better if only the dispossessed will wait patiently, 
and supported by an apathetic, obedient majority, its mind and 
conscience dulled by a surfeit of commodities and by some new 
version of the old system of beliefs and ideas. Perhaps the worst 
excesses may be eliminated. Perhaps a way may be found to 
bring about a fundamental change in American society of a sort 
that can hardly be envisioned today. A great many people have 
been aroused by the Vietnam tragedy and the domestic crisis. 
There is a new mood of questioning and rebellion among the 
youth of the country, a very healthy and hopeful development, 
by and large, that few would have predicted a decade ago. The 
