pay in defense of freedom and the rights of man. 

It is, no doubt, superfluous to discuss at length the ways in 
which we assist other countries to progress towards open socie¬ 
ties “to which our access is free and comfortable.” One enlight¬ 
ening example is discussed in the recent congressional hearings 

353 


*= AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

from which I have now quoted several times, in the testimony 
of Willem Holst and Robert Meagher, representing the Stand¬ 
ing Committee on India of the Business Council for Interna¬ 
tional Understanding. 39 As Mr. Meagher points out: “If it was 
possible, India would probably prefer to import technicians and 
know-how rather than foreign corporations. Such is not possi¬ 
ble; therefore India accepts foreign capital as a necessary evil.” 
Of course, “the question of private capital investment in India 
. . . would be no more than a theoretical exercise” had the 
groundwork for such investment not been laid by foreign aid, 
and were it not that “necessity has forced a modification in 
India’s approach to private foreign capital.” But now, “India’s 
attitude toward private foreign investment is undergoing a sub¬ 
stantial change. From a position of resentment and ambiva¬ 
lence, it is evolving toward an acceptance of its necessity. As 
the necessity becomes more and more evident, the ambivalence 
will probably be replaced by a more accommodating attitude.” 
Mr. Holst contributes what is “perhaps a typical case history,” 
namely, “the plan under which it was proposed that the Indian 
Government in partnership with a United States private con¬ 
sortium was to have increased fertilizer production by a million 
tons per year, which is just double presently installed capacity 
in all of India. The unfortunate demise of this ambitious plan 
may be attributed in large part to the failure of both Govern¬ 
ment and business to find a workable and mutually acceptable 
solution within the framework of the well-publicized 10 busi¬ 
ness incentives.” The difficulty here was in connection with the 
percentage of equity ownership. Obviously, “fertilizers are des¬ 
perately needed in India.” Equally obviously, the consortium 
“insisted that to get the proper kind of control majority owner¬ 
ship was in fact needed.” But “the Indian Government officially 
insisted that they shall have majority ownership,” and “in some- 


354 



