
The suggestion that it was the Chinese hard line that was re¬ 
sponsible for the failure of the American policy of subversion in 
Laos is a most interesting one. According to the American re¬ 
porter Arthur Dommen, who appears to be Hilsman’s primary 
source of information on Laos, the Chinese took no action at all 
in Laos until the end of 1959, despite American violations of the 
Geneva agreements by the supplying of arms and military train¬ 
ing by American officers in civilian clothes ; 74 and after that 
their “interference” consisted of offering support for the neutral¬ 
ist Souvanna Phouma government that the United States was 
trying desperately to replace, first by the “pro-Western neutral¬ 
ist” Phoui and then by the outright fascist Phoumi Nosavan. 
However, this is not the point. To Hilsman, the aggressiveness 
of China and Russia is demonstrated by the fact that they sup¬ 
ported the neutralist Souvanna Phouma against the American- 


265 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


sponsored attempt to overthrow his government through con¬ 
tinual and intensive subversion. 

As to the claim that Hanoi decided to begin guerrilla war in 
the South on the basis of Mao Tse-tung’s new hard line, Hils- 
man makes no attempt to substantiate this allegation, which is 
in conflict with whatever is known of the historical record . 75 

Hilsman, recall, was director of intelligence for the State De¬ 
partment and then Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern 
Affairs; he is a Kennedy liberal and an academic expert on 
international affairs. His treatment of historical events and the 
reasoning on which he bases conclusions about such matters as 
“Chinese aggressiveness” can only be described as appalling. Yet 
it represents the best and most sophisticated thinking that is to 
be found near the center of power, so the available information 
indicates. One cannot escape a feeling of alarm on reading 
Hilsman’s study of how policy was set in the Kennedy admin¬ 
istration. 

In discussing Chinese aggressiveness, we must bear in mind 
that there is a clear sense in which China has already shown 
itself to be very aggressive, namely, the following: 

We must recognize that an overt act of war has been committed 
by an enemy when that enemy builds a military force intended 
for our eventual destruction, and that the destruction of that 
force before it can be launched or employed is defensive action 
and not aggression. As a nation we must understand that an overt 
act of war has been committed long before the delivery of that 
first blow. 76 

One wonders how long it will be before the American Air Force 
undertakes defensive action against such overt acts of war on 
the part of the Chinese. 

It would be wrong to leave this matter of American “con¬ 
tainment” of China without reference to a few simple facts that 


266 




The Logic of Withdrawal 


rarely seem to penetrate the American consciousness. There is 
something peculiarly ugly about the American reaction to the 
attempt of China to achieve national unity, to raise itself from 
penury and starvation, to erase a century of degradation. K. S. 
Karol 77 puts the matter plainly, in words that Americans would 
do well to ponder: 

... by trying to strangle China, which has been permanently on 
the edge of famine, and by threatening her with bombs, America 
has helped to “harden” the Chinese and make them what they are 
today. . . . The American anti-Chinese propaganda . . . boomerangs 
on occasion. Pharisaic editorial writers like Joseph Alsop and 
others periodically announce with contemptible pleasure Chinese 
famines which exist, fortunately, only in their imaginations; but 
their editorials are often read in countries with pro-American 
governments where famine actually rages. Sooner or later truth 
will out, and it is then doubly unfavorable to the Americans, first 
because it is disgusting to see the world’s most overfed country 
rejoicing that others—even if they are Communist—are suffering 
from hunger, and secondly because one discovers that it is not in 
China but in their own camp—in Central or South America, for 
example—that people are dying of malnutrition . . . today a 
Kwangtung peasant eats much better than a peasant in Kerala in 
India—and this is known in Asia. 78 

While sympathizing with China’s problems, one may still 
react with dismay, perhaps even outrage, to the authoritarian 
and repressive character of the Chinese state, as one may have 
