order and reform. Ithiel Pool formulates the central issue as 
follows: 

In the Congo, in Vietnam, in the Dominican Republic, it is clear 
that order depends on somehow compelling newly mobilized 
strata to return to a measure of passivity and defeatism from 
which they have recently been aroused by the process of mod¬ 
ernization. At least temporarily, the maintenance of order re¬ 
quires a lowering of newly acquired aspirations and levels of 
political activity. 20 

This is what “we have learned in the past thirty years of inten¬ 
sive empirical study of contemporary societies. 55 Pool is merely 
describing facts, not proposing policy. A corresponding version 
of the facts is familiar on the domestic scene: workers threaten 
the public order by striking for their demands, the impatience 
of the Negro community threatens the stability of the body 
politic. One can, of course, imagine another way in which order 
can be preserved in all such cases: namely, by meeting the 
demands, or at the very least by removing the barriers that 
have been placed, by force which may be latent and disguised, 
in the way of attempts to satisfy the “newly acquired aspira¬ 
tions. 55 But this might mean that the wealthy and powerful 
would have to sacrifice some degree of privilege, and it is there¬ 
fore excluded as a method for maintenance of order. Such pro¬ 
posals are likely to meet with little sympathy from Pool’s new 
mandarins. 

From the doubly privileged position of the American scholar, 
the transcendent importance of order, stability, and nonvio¬ 
lence (by the oppressed) seems entirely obvious: to others, the 


36 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


matter is not so simple. If we listen, we hear such voices as this, 
from an economist in India: 

It is disingenuous to invoke “democracy,” “due process of law,” 
“non-violence,” to rationalise the absence of action. For mean¬ 
ingful concepts under such conditions become meaningless since, 
in reality, they justify the relentless pervasive exploitation of the 
masses; at once a denial of democracy and a more sinister form 
of violence perpetrated on the overwhelming majority through 
contractual forms . 21 

Moderate American scholarship does not seem capable of com¬ 
prehending these simple truths. 

It w T ould be wrong to leave the impression that the ideology 
of the liberal intelligentsia translates itself into policy as a rain 
of cluster bombs and napalm. In fact, the liberal experts have 
been dismayed by the emphasis on military means in Vietnam 
and have consistently argued that the key to our efforts should 
be social restructuring and economic assistance. Correspond¬ 
ingly, I think that we can perceive more clearly the attitudes 
that are crystallizing among the new mandarins by considering 
the technical studies of pacification, for example, the research 
monograph of William Nighswonger, cited earlier (see note 4 ). 
The author, now a professor of political science, was senior 
United States civilian representative of the Agency for Inter¬ 
national Development in Quang Nam Province from 1962 to 
1964 . As he sees the situation, “the knotty problems of pacifica¬ 
tion are intricately intertwined with the issues of political de¬ 
velopment and they necessitate—at this time in history—inti¬ 
mate American involvement.” Thus Americans must ask some 
“basic questions of value and obligation—questions that tran¬ 
scend the easy legalisms of ‘self-determination’ and ‘noninter¬ 
vention/ ” These easy legalisms have little relevance to a world 

37 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


in which the West is challenged by “the sophisticated method¬ 
ology and quasi-religious motivation of Communist insur¬ 
gency.” It is our duty, in the interest of democracy and free¬ 
dom, to apply our expertise to these twin goals: “to isolate the 
enemy and destroy his influence and control over the rural pop¬ 
ulation, and to win the peasant’s willing support through effec¬ 
tive local administration and programs of rural improvement.” 
“An underlying assumption is that insurgency ought to be de¬ 
feated—for the sake of human rights. . . .” Despite the “re¬ 
markable achievements in economic and social development” in 
Russia and China, “The South Vietnamese peasant deserves 
something better,” and we must give it to him—as we have in 
Latin America and the Philippines—even if this requires aban¬ 
doning the easy legalisms of the past and intervening with mili¬ 
tary force. 

Of course, it won’t be easy. The enemy has enormous ad¬ 
vantages. For one thing, “as in China, the insurgents in Vietnam 
have exploited the Confucian tenets of ethical rule both by their 
attacks on government corruption and by exemplary Com¬ 
