
★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


that the Japanese policy differed from the “oppressive” attitude 
of Britain and the United States, and Eugene Ch’en, then a 
high Kuomintang official, contrasted Japan's nonparticipation in 
the imperialist bombardment of Nanking to the “cruelty in¬ 
herent in the Western civilization”; this “indicated Japan’s 
friendship for China.” The goal of Japanese diplomacy was to 
strengthen the anti-Communist elements in the Kuomintang 
and, at the same time, to support the rule of the warlord Chang 
Tso-lin over an at least semi-independent Manchuria. At the 
time, this seemed not totally unreasonable, although the legal 
position of Japan was insecure and this policy was sure to come 
into conflict with Chinese nationalism. According to one author¬ 
ity: 

As of 1927 Manchuria was politically identifiable with China 
only insofar as its overlord, Chang Tso-lin, was also commander- 
in-chief of the anti-Kuomintang coalition controlling Peking. But 
Chang’s economic and military base in the Three Eastern Prov¬ 
inces was entirely distinct from China, and in the past he had 
occasionally proclaimed Manchuria’s independence. 18 

To the extent that this assessment is accurate, Japanese diplo¬ 
macy was not unrealistic in aiming to prevent the growing na¬ 
tionalist movement in China from overwhelming Manchuria,, 
and at the same time to curb the ambitions of the Manchurian 
warlord to take over all of China. This remained, in essence, the 
goal of the Japanese civilian governments even through the 
“Manchurian incident” of 1931-1932. 

By 1931, it was becoming fairly clear that the relatively con¬ 
ciliatory diplomacy of the 1920s was unlikely to secure the 
“rights and interests” regarded as essential for Japan’s continued 
development. The effects of the great depression were immedi¬ 
ate and severe (see below). The London Treaty had failed to 
provide Japan with military security vis a vis the other imperial- 


174 



The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 

