
234 



The Logic of Withdrawal 


North Vietnamese desisted totally). Occasionally, spokesmen 
for the American government have expressed themselves quite 
clearly about the prospects for negotiations. For example, Gen¬ 
eral Maxwell Taylor stated in August 1965: 

... the army is the power in South Vietnam. The generals are 
completely committed. They’ve burned all their bridges behind 
them. They would never tolerate a government that was caught 
surreptitiously or overtly negotiating with Hanoi or with the Viet- 
cong. 31 

It seems unlikely that either Saigon or Washington will be 
trapped into negotiations, so long as the political base of those 
who collaborate with us in South Vietnam remains as weak as it 
is today. 

Corroborating Hanson Baldwin’s summary of opinion in 
Vietnam, Hedrick Smith reports from Washington that “the 
recent elections did not produce an organized political base for 
the government,” and, in the opinion of United States policy 
makers, “the Saigon regime lacks sufficient popular support and 
cohesion to enter ... a political test of strength with the 
front.” 32 The elections, although they may have temporarily 
calmed American public opinion, have changed little or nothing 
in South Vietnam. An internal report of the United States Mis¬ 
sion 33 in Saigon reports the gloom of American officials over 
the “strange drift from reality regarding the U.S. role in Viet¬ 
nam” among the “South Vietnamese people,” as evidenced, for 
example, in the statement by a group of middle-aged citizens 
that the new mobilization law had been enacted “at the behest 
of the Americans, whose real aim is the extermination of as 
many Vietnamese as possible,” or the question of a legislator 
who asks, “Why should our young men be drafted to serve U.S. 
interests?” 

The mood among Saigon intellectuals is summarized by a 


235 


fr -- AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

retired professor who is “somewhat to the right in the spectrum 
of Saigon intellectuals.” 34 The problem, he states, is that “at 
this point the only intellectuals of character who have com¬ 
mitted themselves are on the other side.” Ho Chi Minh retains 
his popularity, because “he bridged the gap between Vietnam 
and the modern world.” “Everyone knows and admires Ho.” 
The only hope, as the professor sees it, is for the United States 
to put aside pretense and to appoint a new “governor or pro- 
consul for Vietnam.” 

As far as the military situation is concerned, Senator Mans¬ 
field, one of the best-informed members of the Senate on South¬ 
east Asian affairs, concluded after General Westmoreland’s recent 
reports in Washington that he saw “very little, if anything, in 
the pattern of combat operations to indicate any weakening of 
the ability of the Vietcong to keep on fighting.” He believes that 
the NLF remains “the dominant force in South Vietnam,” and 
points out that its “stronghold” in the Mekong Delta “has hardly 
been touched.” The Front, rather than Hanoi, is “the main fac¬ 
tor to be considered in South Vietnam.” 35 

There are, to be sure, certain “pacified” areas, some even with 
few American troops; for example, much of Tay Ninh Province, 
where the Cao Dai is quite strong. But it is interesting to inves¬ 
tigate the details of this success in “pacification.” Elizabeth 
Pond reports that the basis appears to be “a certain accommo¬ 
dation between the Cao Dai and the Viet Cong.” 36 Among the 
Cao Dai intellectuals, the heroes remain those who advocated 
neutralism—particularly, the former “Cao Dai Pope,” Pham 
Cong Tac, who was exiled under Diem. By some, “the only one 
who has carried on the tradition of Pham Cong Tac” is consid¬ 
ered to be Major Nguyen Thanh Mung, who joined the Viet¬ 
cong with his Cao Dai troops. The relation between this model 


236 



The Logic of Withdrawal 


area and the Saigon government is one of strong mutual 
mistrust, according to this report. 

There has been no more revealing commentary on the situa¬ 
tion in the American-controlled areas of South Vietnam than 
the testimony elicited by Congressman Donald Riegle from 
Rutherford Poats, in May 1967, released in September. 37 
