

Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


The study of collectivization published by the CNT in 
193 7 146 concludes with a description of the village of Mem- 
brilla. “In its miserable huts live the poor inhabitants of a poor 
province; eight thousand people, but the streets are not paved, 
the town has no newspaper, no cinema, neither a cafe nor a 
library. On the other hand, it has many churches that have been 
burned.” Immediately after the Franco insurrection, the land 
was expropriated and village life collectivized. “Food, clothing, 
and tools were distributed equitably to the whole population. 
Money was abolished, work collectivized, all goods passed to- 
the community, consumption was socialized. It was, however, 
not a socialization of wealth but of poverty.” Work continued as 
before. An elected council appointed committees to organize 
the life of the commune and its relations to the outside world. 
The necessities of life were distributed freely, insofar as they 
were available. A large number of refugees were accom¬ 
modated. A small library was established, and a small school of 
design. 

The document closes with these words: 

The whole population lived as in a large family; functionaries, 
delegates, the secretary of the syndicates, the members of the 
municipal council, all elected, acted as heads of a family. But 
they were controlled, because special privilege or corruption 
would not be tolerated. Membrilla is perhaps the poorest village 
of Spain, but it is the most just. 

An account such as this, with its concern for human relations 
and the ideal of a just society, must appear very strange to the 
consciousness of the sophisticated intellectual, and it is there¬ 
fore treated with scorn, or taken to be naive or primitive or 
otherwise irrational. Only when such prejudice is abandoned 
will it be possible for historians to undertake a serious study of 


12 a 


+ - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

the popular movement that transformed Republican Spain in 
one of the most remarkable social revolutions that history 
records. 

Franz Borkenau, in commenting on the demoralization 
caused by the authoritarian practices of the central government, 
observes (p. 295) that “newspapers are written by Euro¬ 
peanized editors, and the popular movement is inarticulate as 
to its deepest impulses . . . [which are shown only] ... by acts.” 
The objectivity of scholarship will remain a delusion as long as 
these inarticulate impulses remain beyond its grasp. As far as 
the Spanish revolution is concerned, its history is yet to be 
written. 

I have concentrated on one theme—the interpretation of the 
social revolution in Spain—in one work of history, a work that 
is an excellent example of liberal scholarship. It seems to me 
that there is more than enough evidence to show that a deep 
bias against social revolution and a commitment to the values 
and social order of liberal bourgeois democracy has led the 
author to misrepresent crucial events and to overlook major 
historical currents. My intention has not been to bring into 
question the commitment to these values—that is another mat¬ 
ter entirely. Rather, it has been to show how this commitment 
has led to a striking failure of objectivity, providing an example 
of “counterrevolutionary subordination” of a much more subtle 
and interesting sort—and ultimately, I believe, a far more im¬ 
portant one—than those discussed in the first part of this 
essay. 


Ill 


In opening this discussion of the Spanish revolution I referred 
to the classical left-wing critique of the social role of intellec- 


124 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


tuals, Marxist or otherwise, in modern society, and to Luxem¬ 
burg’s reservations regarding Bolshevism. Western sociologists 
have repeatedly emphasized the relevance of this analysis to 
developments in the Soviet Union, 147 with much justice. The 
same sociologists formulate “the world revolution of the epoch” 
in the following terms: “The major transformation is the decline 
of business (and of earlier social formations) and the rise of 
intellectuals and semi-intellectuals to effective power.” 148 The 
“ultra-left” critic foresaw in these developments a new attack on 
human freedom and a more efficient system of exploitation. The 
