been going on, unreported, for months: “The enemy moves in 
December—which several military men called a ‘softening up 7 
for the offensive—resulted in a wave of allied air strikes on 
villages. Hundreds of homes were destroyed.” Newsweek sum¬ 
marizes the situation in detail, quoting an IVS worker who 
reports from Can Tho that almost all of the casualties were 
caused by United States fire power, in the American counterat¬ 
tack: “As difficult as this may be to believe, not a single Viet¬ 
namese I have met in Saigon or in the Delta blames the Viet 
Cong for the events of the past two weeks.” 97 How sur¬ 
prising. 

The Tet offensive led to a significant change in the political 


274 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


situation in the United States. President Johnson has indicated 
that he will not seek re-election. A number of “peace candi¬ 
dates”—who have yet to discuss the fundamental political issues 
—have received substantial support. For the first time, the 
American government appears willing to take tentative steps 
towards serious negotiations. It is a devastating indictment of 
the state of American democracy that only a major military 
defeat was able to bring about these changes in the political 
climate. If the past is any guide, only continuing military set¬ 
backs in Vietnam and the threat of serious dislocation at home 
will succeed in moving the government towards concrete steps 
that might lead to peace. For the first time, there seems a real 
hope that the war will end without extermination of the Viet¬ 
namese. Nevertheless, those who have devoted themselves to 
working for peace in Vietnam can only be saddened by the 
realization that they have failed to create the consciousness in 
this country that we have no right to win a military victory. It is 
the miraculous heroism of the Vietnamese resistance that has 
forced these tentative moves towards peace in Vietnam. To say 
this is not to make a political judgment with regard to the 
various forces in Vietnamese society, but only to recognize the 
bare and inescapable facts. For the so-called “peace move¬ 
ment,” the recent events pose a major challenge. The “peace 
movement” has been getting by for too long with cheap jokes 
about LBJ and with concentration on peripheral issues such as 
the bombing of North Vietnam. The challenge it now faces is to 
create the understanding that we have no right to set any con¬ 
ditions at all on a political settlement in Vietnam; that Ameri¬ 
can military force must be withdrawn from Vietnam, and from 
