14. See Carl Rowan, in a nationally syndicated column, March 26, 
1967. 

15. “High official” in Washington, explaining a statement to this effect 
by Ambassador Lodge, New York Times, August 13, 1965. 

16. John Oakes, New York Times, April 3, 1967. 

17. New York Times, April 6, 1967. 

18. Shizuo Maruyama, “The Other War in Vietnam: The Revolution¬ 
ary Development Program,” Japan Quarterly, Vol. 14 (July-Septem- 
ber 1967), pp. 297-303. 

19. The reviews of Jonathan Schell’s The Village of Ben Sue (New 
York, Alfred A. Knopf, 1967) have been most remarkable. John 


276 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


Dillin, in the Christian Science Monitor, December 2, 1967, regards 
the book as “sadly incomplete” because it does not draw “conclusions 
about the value of these massive and expensive American efforts.” He 
interprets the book as giving “a mild criticism of the American and 
South Vietnamese roles,” a conclusion which can only amaze anyone 
who has read it, until he realizes that Dillin sees nothing to object to 
in “evacuation and total destruction of four Viet Cong-controlled vil¬ 
lages, including Bensuc,” “a thriving village” of farmers who “were 
healthy and relatively prosperous.” 

John Mecklin {New York Times Book Review, October 29, 1967) 
at least realizes that the reader is likely to feel “violent disgust as the 
enormity of Schell's picture begins to sink in,” and he has to admit 
that “much of Schell's indictment ... is justified, accurate and over¬ 
due.” But he considers it quite unfair; for example, because it fails to 
mention the “monstrous handicaps that plague the United States' 
effort,” specifically, the lack of command authority over the Saigon 
regime (a fact which obviously has no relevance to this purely Ameri¬ 
can operation, conducted without informing the Vietnamese) and “the 
deplorably short tour of duty ... of Americans in Vietnam, making it 
impossible to acquire the kind of experience so badly needed in situa¬ 
tions such as Bensuc.” He thinks, nevertheless, that the book “should 
be required reading in the Pentagon . . . because of its rare pinpointing 
of critical areas where the United States could be doing a better job in 
Vietnam,” presumably, in conducting such operations even more effi¬ 
ciently in the future. 

These reactions testify to a kind of creeping Eichmannism, which in 
fact must also explain the limited reaction to the original New York 
Times report of the Ben Sue operation, January 11, 1967. Pacification 
in Ben Sue had been a total failure, so “the only military or political 
solution for this place,” according to the American colonel in charge, 
was forced resettlement. Of course, some of the villagers weren’t too 
happy about it. “I imagine there will be a lot of wailing and gnashing 
of teeth, but they'll do what they’re told,” said the colonel. Some 
might not do what they were told, of course. “41 villagers did not. 
During the day they were tracked down and killed.” The conclusion? 
“Soon the government will have no need to win the hearts and minds 
of Bensuc. There wall be no Bensuc.” 

One can hardly decide which is more scandalous, the events them¬ 
selves or the muted response. 


277 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


Mecklin, incidentally is responsible for some of the most amazing 
comments on Vietnam. In a review in the New York Tunes Book 
Review, June 4, 1967, he attributes to Thich Nhat Hanh the idiotic 
proposal that “both the Americans and the Communists ... go away 
and allow the Vietnamese to work things out. 55 As senior officer in the 
United States Mission in Saigon from 1962 to 1964, he might, one 
would think, have perceived that the Vietcong were Vietnamese, par¬ 
ticularly since United States officials in Saigon at the end of 1962 
estimated that “about one-half of the South Vietnamese support the 
NLF 55 (Robert Scigliano, South Vietnam: Nation Under Stress [Bos¬ 
ton, Houghton Mifflin Company, 1963], p. 145). In his Mission in 
Torment (Garden City, N.Y., Doubleday & Company, Inc. 1965), 
Mecklin describes the Vietnamese peasant as a man whose “vocabu¬ 
lary is limited to a few hundred words, 55 whose “power of reason . . . 
develops only slightly beyond the level of an American six-year-old, 55 
whose “mind is untrained and therefore atrophies 55 (p. 76); but 
strangely, the political and military tactics of the Vietcong, making use 
of techniques that were “skillfully entwined in the life and character of 
the Vietnamese peasant, 55 “confounded not only the U.S. Mission but 
also the aristocratic leaders of the Diem regime 55 (pp. 78-79). Their 
forces “were developed to a surprisingly sophisticated degree . . . with 
jungle arms factories, radio nets, clandestine hospitals, propaganda 
printing presses, . . . V.C. cameramen filming the action 55 in ambushes 
(p. 79); to the Government forces the Vietcong seemed to be “eight 
