near certainty that the fact of capitalist encirclement, which all 


347 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


★= 

revolutionary movements now have to face, will guarantee this 
result. The lesson, for those who are concerned to strengthen 
the democratic, spontaneous, and popular elements in develop¬ 
ing societies, is quite clear. Lectures on the two-party system, or 
even the really substantial democratic values that have been in 
part realized in Western society, are a monstrous irrelevance in 
the face of the effort that is required to raise the level of culture 
in Western society to the point where it can provide a “social 
lever” for both economic development and the development of 
true democratic institutions in the Third World—and for that 
matter, at home as well. 

A good case can be made for the conclusion that there is 
indeed something of a consensus among intellectuals who have 
already achieved power and affluence, or who sense that they 
can achieve them by “accepting society” as it is and promoting 
the values that are “being honored” in this society. And it is also 
true that this consensus is most noticeable among the scholar- 
experts who are replacing the free-floating intellectuals of the 
past. In the university, these scholar-experts construct a “value- 
free technology” for the solution of technical problems that 
arise in contemporary society, 28 taking a “responsible stance” 
towards these problems, in the sense noted earlier. This con¬ 
sensus among the responsible scholar-experts is the domestic 
analogue to that proposed, in the international arena, by those 
who justify the application of American power in Asia, what¬ 
ever the human cost, on the grounds that it is necessary to 
contain the “expansion of China” (an “expansion” which is, to 
be sure, hypothetical for the time being) 29 —to translate from 
State Department Newspeak, on the grounds that it is essential 
to reverse the Asian nationalist revolutions, or at least to pre¬ 
vent them from spreading. The analogy becomes clear when we 
look carefully at the ways in which this proposal is formulated. 


348 



The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


With his usual lucidity, Churchill outlined the general position 
in a remark to his colleague of the moment, Joseph Stalin, at 
Teheran in 1943: . . the government of the world must be 

entrusted to satisfied nations, who wished nothing more for 
themselves than what they had. If the world-government were 
in the hand of hungry nations, there would always be danger. 
But none of us had any reason to seek for anything more. The 
peace would be kept by peoples who lived in their own way 
and were not ambitious. Our power placed us above the rest. 
We were like rich men dwelling at peace within their habita¬ 
tions. 7730 

For a translation of ChurchilFs biblical rhetoric into the 
jargon of contemporary social science, one may turn to the 
testimony of Charles Wolf, senior economist of the RAND Cor¬ 
poration, at the congressional committee hearings cited earlier: 

I am dubious that China’s fears of encirclement are going to be 
abated, eased, relaxed in the long-term future. But I would hope 
that what we do in Southeast Asia would help to develop within 
the Chinese body politic more of a realism and willingness to live 
with this fear than to indulge it by support for liberation move¬ 
ments, which admittedly depend on a great deal more than ex¬ 
ternal support . . . the operational question for American foreign 
policy is not whether that fear can be eliminated or substantially 
alleviated, but whether China can be faced with a structure of 
incentives, of penalties and rewards, of inducements that will 
make it willing to live with this fear . 31 

The point is further clarified by Thomas Schelling: “There is 
growing experience which the Chinese can profit from, that 
although the United States may be interested in encircling 
them, may be interested in defending nearby areas from them, 
it is, nevertheless, prepared to behave peaceably if they are. 7732 

In short, we are prepared to live peaceably within our—to be 
sure, rather extensive—habitations. And quite naturally, we are 


34 & 


* - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

offended by the undignified noises from the servants’ quarters. 
If, let us say, a peasant-based revolutionary movement tries to 
