that the social and behavioral sciences will in various ways be 
made to serve in defense of national policy or as a mask for 
special interest. It is not merely that intellectuals are strongly 
tempted, in a society that offers them prestige and affluence, to 
take what is now called a “pragmatic attitude” (in a perverse 
sense of “pragmatism” which is, sad to say, not without some 
historical justification, as shown in the Dewey-Bourne inter¬ 
change during the First World War—see Introduction, pages 
5-7), that is, an attitude that one must “accept,” not criti¬ 
cally analyze or struggle to change, the existing distribution of 
power, domestic or international, and the political realities that 
flow from it, and must work only for “slow measures of im¬ 
provement” in a technological, piecemeal manner. It is not 
merely that having taken this position (conceivably with some 
justification, at a particular historical moment), one is strongly 
tempted to provide it with an ideological justification of a very 
general sort. Rather, what we must also expect is that political 
elites will use the terminology of the social and behavioral sci¬ 
ences to protect their actions from critical analysis—the non¬ 
specialist does not, after all, presume to tell physicists and engi- 


317 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


neers how to build an atomic reactor. And for any particular 
action, experts can certainly be found in the universities who 
will solemnly testify as to its appropriateness and realism. This 
is not a matter of speculation; thus we already find, in congres¬ 
sional testimony, the proposal by a leading political scientist 
that we try to impose mass starvation on a quarter of the 
human race, if their government does not accept our dictates. 
And it is commonly argued that the free-floating intellectual, 
who is now outdated, has no business questioning the conclu¬ 
sions of the professional expert, equipped with the tools of 
modern science. 

This situation again carries a lesson for the schools, one to 
which teachers in particular should be quite sensitive, bom¬ 
barded as they have been in recent years by authoritative con¬ 
clusions about what has been “demonstrated” with regard to 
human learning, language, and so on. The social and behavioral 
sciences should be seriously studied not only for their intrinsic 
interest, but so that the student can be made quite aware of 
exactly how little they have to say about the problems of man 
and society that really matter. They should, furthermore, be 
studied in the context of the physical sciences, so that the stu¬ 
dent can be brought to appreciate clearly the limits of their 
intellectual content. This can be an important way to protect a 
student from the propaganda of the future, and to put him in a 
position to comprehend the true nature of the means that are 
sure to be used to conceal the real significance of domestic or 
international policy. 

Suppose, however, that contrary to all present indications, 
the United States will stop short of using its awesome resources 
of violence and devastation to impose its passionately held 
ideology and its approved form of social organization on large 
areas of the world. Suppose, that is, that American policy ceases 


318 


Some Thoughts on Intellectuals and the Schools 


to be dominated by the principles that were crudely outlined by 
President Truman almost twenty years ago, when he suggested 
in a famous and important speech that the basic freedom is free¬ 
dom of enterprise and that the whole world should adopt 
the American system, which could survive in ’America only 
if it became a world system (see note 82, page 293). It 
would nevertheless remain true that the level of culture that can 
be achieved in the United States is a matter of overwhelming 
importance for the rest of the world. If we want to be truly 
utopian, we may consider the possibility that American re¬ 
sources might be used to alleviate the terrorism that seems to be 
an inevitable correlate of modernization, if we can judge from 
past and present history. We can conceive of the possibility that 
the schools, or the intellectuals, might pay serious attention to 
questions that have been posed for centuries, that they might 
ask whether society must, indeed, be a Hobbesian bellum 
omnium contra omnes , and might inquire into the contempo¬ 
rary meaning of Rousseau’s protest that it is contrary to natural 
right that “a handful of men be glutted with superfluities while 
the starving multitude lacks necessities.” They might raise the 
moral issue faced, or avoided, by one who enjoys his wealth and 
privilege undisturbed by the knowledge that half of the chil¬ 
dren born in Nicaragua will not reach five years of age, or that 
only a few miles away there is unspeakable poverty, brutal 
suppression of human rights, and almost no hope for the future; 
and they might raise the intellectual issue of how this can be 
changed. They might ask, with Keynes, how long we must con¬ 
tinue to “exalt some of the most distasteful of human qualities 
