94 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


In short, the workers of Barcelona were not merely giving 
way to “feelings of resentment and of somehow having been 
cheated” when they learned of “the unsuspected complexity of 
modern society.” Rather, they had good reason to believe that 
they were being cheated, by the old dog with the new collar. 
George Orwell's observations are also highly relevant: 

Everyone who has made two visits, at intervals of months, to 
Barcelona during the war has remarked upon the extraordinary 
changes that took place in it. And curiously enough, whether 
they went there first in August and again in January, or, like 
myself, first in December and again in April, the thing they said 
was always the same: that the revolutionary atmosphere had 
vanished. No doubt to anyone who had been there in August, 
when the blood was scarcely dry in the streets and militia were 
quartered in the small hotels, Barcelona in December would have 
seemed bourgeois; to me, fresh from England, it was liker to a 
workers’ city than anything I had conceived possible. Now [in 
April] the tide had rolled back. Once again it was an ordinary 
city, a little pinched and chipped by war, but with no outward 
sign of working-class predominance. . . . Fat prosperous men, 
elegant w r omen, and sleek cars were everywhere. . . . The officers 
of the new Popular Army, a type that had scarcely existed when I 
left Barcelona, swarmed in surprising numbers . . . [wearing] an 
elegant khaki uniform with a tight waist, like a British Army 
officer’s uniform, only a little more so. I do not suppose that 
more than one in twenty of them had yet been to the front, but 
all of them had automatic pistols strapped to their belts; we, at 
the front, could not get pistols for love or money. . . .* A deep 
change had come over the town. There were two facts that were 
the keynote of all else. One was that the people—the civil popula¬ 
tion—had lost much of their interest in the war; the other was 
that the normal division of society into rich and poor, upper class 
and lower class, was reasserting itself . 90 

* Orwell had just returned from the Aragon front, where he had been 
serving with the POUM militia in an area heavily dominated by left- 
wing (POUM and anarchist) troops. 


95 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


Whereas Jackson attributes the ebbing of the revolutionary 
tide to the discovery of the unsuspected complexity of modern 
society, Orwell’s firsthand observations, like those of Borkenau, 
suggest a far simpler explanation. What calls for explanation is 
not the disaffection of the workers of Barcelona but the curious 
constructions of the historian. 

Let me repeat, at this point, Jackson’s comments regarding 
Juan Comorera: Comorera “immediately took steps to end 
barter and requisitioning, and became a defender of the peas¬ 
ants against the revolution”; he “ended requisitions, restored 
money payments, and protected the Catalan peasants against 
further collectivization.” These comments imply that the peas¬ 
antry of Catalonia was, as a body, opposed to the revolution 
and that Comorera put a stop to the collectivization that they 
feared. Jackson nowdiere indicates any divisions among the 
peasantry on this issue and offers no support for the implied 
claim that collectivization w r as in process at the period of 
Comorera’s access to power. In fact, it is questionable that 
Comorera’s rise to power affected the course of collectivization 
in Catalonia. Evidence is difficult to come by, but it seems that 
collectivization of agriculture in Catalonia was not, in any 
event, extensive, and that it was not extending in December, 
when Comorera took office. We know from anarchist sources 
that there had been instances of forced collectivization in Cata¬ 
lonia, 91 but I can find no evidence that Comorera “protected 
the peasantry” from forced collectivization. Furthermore, it is 
misleading, at best, to imply that the peasantry as a whole was 
opposed to collectivization. A more accurate picture is pre¬ 
sented by Bolloten (p. 56), who points out that “if the indi¬ 
vidual farmer viewed with dismay the swift and widespread 
development of collectivized agriculture, the farm workers of 
the Anarchosyndicalist CNT and the Socialist UGT saw in it, 


96 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


on the contrary, the commencement of a new era.” In short, 
there was a complex class struggle in the countryside, though 
one learns little about it from Jackson’s oversimplified and mis¬ 
leading account. It would seem fair to suppose that this distor¬ 
