broad, conceptual level, the main concern of counterinsurgency 
efforts should be to influence the behavior of the population 
rather than their loyalties and attitudes”; “the primary consider¬ 
ation should be whether the proposed measure is likely to in¬ 
crease the cost and difficulties of insurgent operations and help 
to disrupt the insurgent organization, rather than whether it 
wins popular loyalty and support, or whether it contributes to a 
more productive, efficient, or equitable use of resources.” 

Other scholars have elaborated on the advantages of Wolfs 
“alternative approach,” which concerns itself with control of 
behavior rather than the mystique of popular support. For ex¬ 
ample, Morton H. Halperin, of the Harvard Center for Inter¬ 
national Affairs, writes that in Vietnam, the United States “has 
been able to prevent any large-scale Vietcong victories, regard¬ 
less of the loyalties of the people.” Thus we have an empirical 
demonstration of a certain principle of behavioral science, as 
Halperin notes: 

The events in Vietnam also illustrate the fact that most people 
tend to be motivated, not by abstract appeals, but rather by their 
perception of the course of action that is most likely to lead to 
their own personal security and to the satisfaction of their eco¬ 
nomic, social, and psychological desires. Thus, for example, large- 
scale American bombing in South Vietnam may have antag¬ 
onized a number of people; but at the same time it demonstrated 
to these people that the Vietcong could not guarantee their se¬ 
curity as it had been able to do before the bombing and that the 
belief in an imminent victory for the Vietcong might turn out to 
be dangerously false . 33 


55 


* = AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

In short, along with “confiscation of chickens, razing of houses, 
or destruction of villages,” we can also make effective use of 100 
pounds of explosives per person, 12 tons per square mile, as in 
Vietnam, as a technique for controlling behavior, relying on the 
principle, now once again confirmed by experiment, that satis¬ 
faction of desires is a more important motivation in human 
behavior than abstract appeals to loyalty. Surely this is ex¬ 
tremely sane advice. It would, for example, be absurd to try to 
control the behavior of a rat by winning its loyalty rather than 
by the proper scheduling of reinforcement. 

An added advantage of this new, more scientific approach is 
that it will “modify the attitudes with wdiich counterinsurgency 
efforts are viewed in the United States” 34 (when we turn to the 
United States, of course, we are concerned with people whose 
attitudes must be taken into account, not merely their behav¬ 
ior). It will help us overcome one of the main defects in the 
American character, the “emotional reaction” that leads us to 
side with “crusaders for the common man” and against a “ruth¬ 
less, exploitative tyrant” (“that there may be reality as well as 
appearance in this role-casting is not the point”). This senti¬ 
mentality “frequently interferes with a realistic assessment of 
alternatives, and inclines us instead toward a carping right¬ 
eousness in our relations with the beleaguered government we 
are ostensibly supporting”; it may be overcome by concentra¬ 
tion on control of behavior rather than modification of attitudes 
or the winning of hearts and minds. Hence the new approach to 
counterinsurgency should not only be effective in extending the 
control of American-approved governments, but it may also 
have a beneficial effect on us. The possibilities are awe-inspir¬ 
ing. Perhaps in this way we can even escape the confines of our 
“guilt culture in w*hich there is a tradition of belief in equality.” 

It is extremely important, Wolf would claim, that we develop 


56 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


a rational understanding of insurgency, for “insurgency is prob¬ 
ably the most likely type of politico-military threat in the third 
world, and surely one of the most complex and challenging 
problems facing United States policies and programs.” The 
primary objective of American foreign policy in the Third 
World must be “the denial of communist control,” specifically, 
the support of countries that are defending their “independence 
from external and internal communist domination.” The latter 
problem, defending independence from internal Communist 
domination, is the crucial problem, particularly in Latin Amer¬ 
ica. We must counter the threat by a policy of promoting eco¬ 
nomic growth and modernization (making sure, however, to avoid 
the risks inherent in these processes—cf. Mitchell), combined 
with “a responsible use of force.” No question is raised about the 
appropriateness of our use of force in a country threatened by 
insurgency. The justification, were the question raised, is in¬ 
herent in the assumption that we live “in a world in which loss 
of national independence is often synonymous with communist 
control, and communism is implicitly considered to be irrever¬ 
sible.” Thus, by Orwellian logic, we are actually defending na¬ 
tional independence when we intervene with military force to 
