if they would join. 

66. Ibid., p. 150. 

67. Cf. Lyndon B. Johnson, August 18, 1967. In noting the all-too- 
obvious parallels between Japanese fascism and contemporary Ameri¬ 
can imperialism in Southeast Asia, we should also not overlook the 
fundamental differences; in particular, the fact that Japan really was 


210 


The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


fighting for its survival as a great power, in the face of great-power 
“encirclement” that was no paranoid delusion. 

68. “Despite the vigor of the Japanese government’s efforts to convey 
the idea that they wanted American aid in achieving a quick settlement 
[in 1937], United States officials again failed to understand the situa¬ 
tion” (Borg, op. cit.y p. 466). Unfortunately for the Japanese apolo¬ 
gists, they were unable to use some of the devices available to their 
current American counterparts to explain the failure of the Chinese to 
accept their honorable offers. For example, the director of Harvard’s 
East Asian Research Center, John King Fairbank, thoughtfully ex¬ 
plains that “when we offer to negotiate we are making an honorable 
offer which, in our view, is a civilized and normal thing to do,” but the 
Asian mind does not share our belief “in the supremacy of law and the 
rights of the individual protected by law through due process” and is 
thus unable to perceive our honorable intent and obvious sincerity 
(Boston Globe y August 19, 1967). It is only those rather superficial 
critics who do not understand the Asian mind who insist on taking the 
North Vietnamese literally when they state that negotiations can fol¬ 
low a cessation of the bombing of North Vietnam, or who point out 
the moral absurdity of the plea that both the victim and his assailant 
“cease their violence.” 

69. Cf. Butow, op. cit. y pp. 122, 134. 

70. David J. Lu, From the Marco Polo Bridge t$ Pearl Harbor 
(Washington, Public Affairs Press, 1961), p. 19. 

71. Butow, op. cit.y pp. 273 f. 

72. Cf. Pal, op. cit.y p. 212. 

73. Ibid.y p. 213. The United States was the least offender in this 
regard, abandoning its control over Chinese tariffs in 1928. Germany 
