nets fell under not dissimilar circumstances. The health of our 
system would have been demonstrated by a change of policy 
caused by a recognition that what we have done in Vietnam is 
wrong, a criminal act, that an American “victory” would have 
been a tragedy. Nothing could be more remote from the Ameri¬ 
can political consciousness. So long as this remains true, we are 
fated to relive this horror. 

The primary reason for opposition to the war is its cost to us. 
A second cause is the feeling that the cost to its victims is too 
great. At first glance, this reaction seems to be at a higher moral 
level than the first, but this is questionable. The principle that 
we should retract our claws when the victim bleeds too much is 
hardly an elevated one. What about opposition to the war on 
the grounds that we have no right to stabilize or restructure 
Vietnamese society, or to carry out the experiments with “mate¬ 
rial and human resources control” that delight the “pacification 
theorist”? Such opposition is slight, and in the political arena 
virtually nonexistent. The pragmatic and responsible student of 


11 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


contemporary affairs does not descend to such emotionalism. 

In March 1968, the Boston Globe ran a series of letters from a 
member of the International Voluntary Services, a teacher in a 
Montagnard village, obviously a person of great courage and 
dedication. For the most part, these were nice, chatty letters 
about life in Vietnam and the good things we’re doing for those 
poor people over there. Here are some selections from one let¬ 
ter: 

Funny thing about Vietnam, we’re creating these secure islands, 
people are relocated, shuffled into “pacified” areas, but most of 
the country is a no man’s land which we’re rapidly turning into a 
desert by bombing, defoliation, etc. ... If the Americans get their 
way, it’ll be a country of beaches, plus a few islands of secure 
areas . . . and the rest’ll be wasteland. Funny thing to do to a 
country whose economy and politics you’re paying to enhance. 
But they say the only way to beat the guerrilla forces is to 
eliminate their source of life (the land and the people), ruin the 
land and concentrate the people into areas you can protect . 4 

I think that such a letter tells us a good deal about the mood 
of the country today. A member of the IVS learns that what we 
