Madrid, “as in Barcelona and Valencia, abused their sudden 
authority to place the sign incautado [placed under workers’ 
control] on all manner of buildings and vehicles” (p. 279). 


86 



Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


Why was this an abuse of authority? This Jackson does not 
explain. The choice of words indicates a reluctance on Jackson’s 
part to recognize the reality of the revolutionary situation, de¬ 
spite his account of the breakdown of Republican authority. 
The statement that the workers “abused their sudden authority” 
by carrying out collectivization rests on a moral judgment that 
recalls that of Ithiel Pool, when he characterizes land reform in 
Vietnam as a matter of “despoiling one’s neighbors,” or of Franz 
Borkenau, when he speaks of expropriation in the Soviet Union 
as “robbery,” demonstrating “a streak of moral indifference.” 

Within a few months, Jackson informs us, “the revolutionary 
tide began to ebb in Catalonia” after “accumulating food and 
supply problems, and the experience of administering villages, 
frontier posts, and public utilities, had rapidly shown the 
anarchists the unsuspected complexity of modern society” (pp. 
313-14). In Barcelona, “the naive optimism of the revolutionary 
conquests of the previous August had given way to feelings of 
resentment and of somehow having been cheated,” as the cost 
of living doubled, bread was in short supply, and police bru¬ 
tality reached the levels of the monarchy. “The POUM and the 
anarchist press simultaneously extolled the collectivizations and 
explained the failures of production as due to Valencia policies 
of boycotting the Catalan economy and favoring the bour¬ 
geoisie. They explained the loss of Malaga as due in large mea¬ 
sure to the low morale and the disorientation of the Andalusian 
proletariat, which saw the Valencia government evolving stead¬ 
ily toward the right” (p. 368). Jackson evidently believes that 
this left-wing interpretation of events was nonsensical, and that 
in fact it was anarchist incompetence or treachery that was 
responsible for the difficulties: “In Catalonia, the CNT factory 
committees dragged their heels on war production, claiming 


87 


'k - 
