
This is the situation to which Howard Zinn has addressed 
himself in a lucid and compelling study which advocates, very 
simply, that the United States accept the principle adopted by 
the other great powers at Geneva in 1954 and agree to turn 
Vietnam over to the Vietnamese. 1 “The daily toll in Vietnam of 
innocent people is so terrible that the cessation of our military 
activity—the bombings, the burning and the shelling of vil¬ 
lages, the search and destroy operations—has become no longer 
debatable or negotiable, but a matter of urgent and unilateral 
action.” And the only action on our part that can mitigate the 
torture, that can avert the still greater catastrophe that lies in 
wait, is to remove the military force that bears the primary 
responsibility. Since, happily, this is the one policy that we can 
successfully implement, there is a feasible alternative to devas¬ 
tation of Vietnam or a global conflict. 

The proposal that the United States withdraw will be dis¬ 
missed as “extremist.” To those who like to describe themselves 
as “responsible” or “realistic,” withdrawal is politically impossi¬ 
ble, and the analysis of the situation in Vietnam on which the 
proposal is based hopelessly naive. 

On the issue of domestic politics, Zinn argues that “the so- 
called ‘realists’ who urge us to speak softly and so persuade the 
President are working against the reality, which is that the Pres¬ 
ident responds to self-interest rather than to rational argument. 

. . . If enough people speak for withdrawal, it can become 
politically feasible.” Only a combination of factors can end the 


222 




The Logic of Withdrawal 


war; hence “every citizen must put his full moral weight, his 
whole argument, into the balance.” In fact, the government is 
not a monolith. As the political and military realities in Vietnam 
emerge through the haze of pretense and deception, the ad¬ 
visability, the desperate urgency of American withdrawal may 
become correspondingly apparent, to some at least. Consider, 
for example, the reaction of Senator Young to the news that the 
South Vietnamese forces are unwilling to do what amounts to 
police work, so that so-called “pacification” must be taken over 
by the American army: 
