to replace “the allure of the martial in war” and “the allure of 
the technical” by “the allure of fresh and true ideas, of free 
speculation, of artistic vigor, of cultural styles, of intelligence 
suffused by feeling, and feeling given fibre and outline by intel¬ 
ligence.” These words of Bourne’s are no program for action, 
but an injunction to seek such a program and create for our¬ 
selves, for others, the understanding that can give it life. There 


7 


- AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

has been little advance in this direction since he wrote. Given 
the present realities of American power, the challenge becomes 
an urgent, desperate necessity. 

The essays collected here are, for the most part, highly criti¬ 
cal of the role that American intellectuals have played in de¬ 
signing and implementing policy, interpreting historical events, 
and formulating an ideology of social change that in part falsi¬ 
fies, in part restricts and subverts it. Because of this critical 
tone, I want to make it clear at the outset that if any note of self- 
righteousness creeps in, it is unintended and, more important, 
unjustified. No one who involved himself in antiwar activities as 
late as 1965, as I did, has any reason for pride or satisfaction. 
This opposition was ten or fifteen years too late. This is one 
lesson we should have learned from the tragedy of Vietnam. 

For the most part, these essays are elaborated versions of 
lectures given over the past few years. During these years, I 
have taken part in more conferences, debates, forums, teach-ins, 
meetings on Vietnam and American imperialism than I care to 
remember. Perhaps I should mention that, increasingly, I have 
had a certain feeling of falseness in these lectures and discus¬ 
sions. This feeling does not have to do with the intellectual 
issues. The basic facts are clear enough; the assessment of the 
situation is as accurate as I can make it. But the entire perfor¬ 
mance is emotionally and morally false in a disturbing way. It is 
a feeling that I have occasionally been struck by before. For ex¬ 
ample, I remember reading an excellent study of Hitler’s East 
European policies a number of years ago in a mood of grim 
fascination. The author was trying hard to be cool and scholarly 
and objective, to stifle the only human response to a plan to 
enslave and destroy millions of subhuman organisms so that the 
inheritors of the spiritual values of Western civilization would 


8 



Introduction 


be free to develop a higher form of society in peace. Controlling 
this elementary human reaction, we enter into a technical de¬ 
bate with the Nazi intelligentsia: Is it technically feasible to 
dispose of millions of bodies? What is the evidence that the 
Slavs are inferior beings? Must they be ground under foot or 
returned to their “natural” home in the East so that this great 
culture can flourish, to the benefit of all mankind? Is it true that 
the Jews are a cancer eating away at the vitality of the German 
people? and so on. Without awareness, I found myself drawn 
into this morass of insane rationality—inventing arguments to 
counter and demolish the constructions of the Bormanns and 
the Rosenbergs. 

By entering into the arena of argument and counterargu¬ 
ment, of technical feasibility and tactics, of footnotes and cita¬ 
tions, by accepting the presumption of legitimacy of debate on 
certain issues, one has already lost one’s humanity. This is the 
feeling I find almost impossible to repress when going through 
the motions of building a case against the American war in 
Vietnam. Anyone who puts a fraction of his mind to the task 
can construct a case that is overwhelming; surely this is now 
obvious. In an important way, by doing so he degrades himself, 
and insults beyond measure the victims of our violence and our 
moral blindness. There may have been a time when American 
policy in Vietnam was a debatable matter. This time is long 
past. It is no more debatable than the Italian war in Abyssinia 
or the Russian suppression of Hungarian freedom. The war is 
simply an obscenity, a depraved act by weak and miserable 
men, including all of us, who have allowed it to go on and on 
with endless fury and destruction—all of us who would have 
remained silent had stability and order been secured. It is not 
pleasant to use such words, but candor permits no less. 


9 


* - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

The things we have seen and read during these horrible years 
surpass belief. I have in front of me now an Associated Press 
photo from the New York Times with this caption: 

homeless children: Girl holds her wounded baby sister as South 
