It is impossible even to imagine what Brzezinski thinks a 
“universal electronic-computer language” may be, or what cul¬ 
tural values he thinks will be created by the new “technologi¬ 
cally dominant and conditioned technetron” who, he apparently 
believes, may prove to be the true “repository of that indefinable 
quality we call human.” It would hardly be rewarding to try to 
disentangle Brzezinski’s confusions and misunderstandings. What 
is interesting, rather, is the way his dim awareness of current de¬ 
velopments in science and technology is used to provide an 
ideological justification for the “increasing role in the key de¬ 
cision-making institutions of individuals with special intellectual 
and scientific attainments,” the new “organisation-oriented, ap¬ 
plication-minded intellectuals” based in the university, “the 
creative eye of the massive communications complex.” 

Parallel to the assumption that all is basically well at home is 
the widely articulated belief that the problems of international 
society, too, would be subject to intelligent management were it 
not for the machinations of the Communists. One aspect of this 
complacence is the belief that the Cold War was entirely the 
result of Russian (later Chinese) aggressiveness. For example, 
Daniel Bell has described the origins of the Cold War in the 
following terms: “When the Russians began stirring up the 
Greek guerrilla EAM in what had been tacitly acknowledged at 

31 


ic- - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

Teheran as a British sphere of influence, the Communists began 
their cry against Anglo-American imperialism. Following the 
rejection of the Marshall Plan and the Communist coup in 
Czechoslovakia in February, 1948, the Cold War was on in 
earnest.’’ 15 Clearly, this will hardly do as a balanced and objec¬ 
tive statement of the origins of the Cold War, but the distortion 
it reflects is an inherent element in Bell’s optimism about the 
new society, since it enables him to maintain that our Cold War 
posture is purely reactive, and that once Communist belliger¬ 
ence is tamed, the new technical intelligentsia can turn its at¬ 
tention to the construction of a more decent society. 

A related element in the ideology of the liberal intellectual is 
the firm belief in the fundamental generosity of Western policy 
towards the Third World. Adam Ulam again provides a typical 
example: “Problems of an international society undergoing an 
economic and ideological revolution seem to defy ... the gen¬ 
erosity—granted its qualifications and errors—that has charac¬ 
terized the policy of the leading democratic powers of the 
West.” 16 Even Hans Morgenthau succumbs to this illusion. He 
summarizes a discussion of intervention with these remarks: 
“We have intervened in the political, military and economic 
affairs of other countries to the tune of far in excess of $100 
billion, and we are at present involved in a costly and risky war 
in order to build a nation in South Vietnam. Only the enemies 
of the United States will question the generosity of these efforts, 
which have no parallel in history.” 17 Whatever one may think 
about the $100 billion, it is difficult to see why anyone should 
take seriously the professed “generosity” of our effort to build a 
nation in South Vietnam, any more than the similar professions 
of benevolence by our many forerunners in such enterprises. 
Generosity has never been a commodity in short supply among 
powers bent on extending their hegemony. 


32 



Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


Still another strand in the ideology of the new emerging elite 
is the concern for order, for maintaining the status quo, which is 
now seen to be quite favorable and essentially just. An excellent 
example is the statement by fourteen leading political scientists 
and historians on United States Asian policy, recently dis¬ 
tributed by the Freedom House Public Affairs Institute. 18 
These scholars designate themselves as “the moderate segment 
of the academic community.” The designation is accurate; they 
stand midway between the two varieties of extremism, one 
which demands that we destroy everyone who stands in our 
path, the other, that we adopt the principles of international 
behavior we require of every other world power. The purpose 
of their statement is to “challenge those among us who, over¬ 
whelmed by guilt complexes, find comfort in asserting or imply¬ 
ing that we are always wrong, our critics always right, and that 
only doom lies ahead.” They find our record in Asia to be “re¬ 
markably good,” and applaud our demonstrated ability to 
rectify mistakes, our “capacity for pragmatism and self-exami¬ 
nation,” and our “healthy avoidance of narrow nationalism,” 
capacities which distinguish us “among the major societies of 
this era.” 

The moderate scholars warn that “to avoid a major war in the 
Asia-Pacific region, it is essential that the United States con¬ 
tinue to deter, restrain, and counterbalance Chinese power.” 
True, “China has exercised great prudence in avoiding a direct 
confrontation with the United States or the Soviet Union” since 
the Korean War, and it is likely that China will “continue to 
