ments in this country will be looking to Germany as the bul¬ 
wark against Communism in Europe. ... Do not let us be in a 
hurry to condemn Germany. We shall be welcoming Germany 
as our friend.” 136 In September 1938, the Munich agreement 
was concluded; shortly after, both France and Britain did wel¬ 
come Germany as “our friend.” As noted earlier (see note 99), 
even Churchill’s role at this time is subject to some question. Of 
course, the Munich agreement w r as the death knell for the Span¬ 
ish Republic, exactly as the necessity to rely on the Soviet 
Union signaled the end of the Spanish revolution in 1937. 

The United States, like France, exhibited less initiative in 
these events than Great Britain, which had far more substantial 
economic interests in Spain and was more of an independent 


120 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


force in European affairs. Nevertheless, the American record is 
hardly one to inspire pride. Technically, the United States 
adhered to a position of strict neutrality. However, a careful 
look raises some doubts. According to information obtained by 
Jackson, “the American colonel who headed the Telephone 
Company had placed private lines at the disposal of the Madrid 
plotters for their conversations with Generals Mola and 
Franco,” 137 just prior to the insurrection on July 17. In August,, 
the American government urged the Martin Aircraft Company 
not to honor an agreement made prior to the insurrection to 
supply aircraft to the Republic, and it also pressured the Mexi¬ 
can government not to reship to Spain war materials purchased 
in the United States. 138 An American arms exporter, Robert 
Cuse, insisted on his legal right to ship airplanes and aircraft 
engines to the Republic in December 1936, and the State De¬ 
partment was forced to grant authorization. Cuse was de¬ 
nounced by Roosevelt as unpatriotic, though Roosevelt was 
forced to admit that the request was quite legal. Roosevelt con¬ 
trasted the attitude of other businessmen to Cuse as follows: 

Well, these companies went along with the request of the Gov¬ 
ernment. There is the 90 percent of business that is honest, I 
mean ethically honest. There is the 90 percent we are always 
pointing at with pride. And then one man does what amounts to 
a perfectly legal but thoroughly unpatriotic act. He represents the 
10 percent of business that does not live up to the best standards. 
Excuse the homily, but I feel quite deeply about it. 139 

Among the businesses that remained “ethically honest” and 
therefore did not incur Roosevelt's wrath was the Texaco Oil 
Company, which violated its contracts with the Spanish Repub¬ 
lic and shipped oil instead to Franco. (Five tankers that were 
on the high seas in July 1936 were diverted to Franco, who 
received six million dollars worth of oil on credit during the 


121 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


Civil War.) Apparently, neither the press nor the American 
government was able to discover this fact, though it was re¬ 
ported in left-wing journals at the time. 140 There is evidence 
that the American government shared the fears of Churchill 
and others about the dangerous forces on the Republican side. 
Secretary of State Cordell Hull, for example, informed Roose¬ 
velt on July 23, 1936, that “one of the most serious factors in this 
situation lies in the fact that the [Spanish] Government has 
distributed large quantities of arms and ammunition into the 
hands of irresponsible members of left-wing political organiza¬ 
tions.” 141 

Like Churchill, many responsible Americans began to rethink 
their attitude towards the Republic after the social revolution 
had been crushed. 142 However, relations with Franco con¬ 
tinued cordial. In 1957, President Eisenhower congratulated 
Franco on the “happy anniversary” of his rebellion, 143 and Sec¬ 
retary Rusk added his tribute in 1961. Upon criticism, Rusk was 
defended by the American ambassador to Madrid, who ob¬ 
served that Spain is “a nation which understands the implacable 
nature of the communist threat,” 144 like Thailand, South 
Korea, Taiwan, and selected other countries of the Free 
World. 145 

In the light of such facts as these, it seems to me that Jackson 
is not treating the historical record seriously when he dismisses 
the proposals of the Spanish left as absurd. Quite possibly 
Berneri’s strategy would have failed, as did that of the liberal- 
Communist coalition that took over the Republic. It was far 
from senseless, however. I think that the failure of historians to 
consider it more seriously follows, once again, from the elitist 
bias that dominates the writing of history—and, in this case, 
from a certain sentimentality about the Western democracies. 


122 
