forces of Catalonia have united in a program of Syndicalist-Socialist 


149 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


character . . . Anarcho-Syndicalism, hitherto so despised, has revealed 
itself as a great constructive force. I am no Anarchist, but I regard it 
as my duty to express here my opinion of the Anarchists of Catalonia, 
who have all too often been represented as a destructive if not a 
criminal element. 

Brockway: I was impressed by the strength of the C.N.T. It was un¬ 
necessary to tell me that it is the largest and most vital of the working 
class organizations in Spain. That was evident on all sides. The large 
industries were clearly in the main in the hands of the C.N.T.—rail¬ 
ways, road transport, shipping, engineering, textiles, electricity, building, 
agriculture. ... I was immensely impressed by the constructive revolu¬ 
tionary work which is being done by the C.N.T. Their achievements 
of workers’ control in industry is an inspiration. . . . There are still 
some Britishers and Americans who regard the Anarchists of Spain as 
impossible, undisciplined uncontrollables. This is poles away from the 
truth. The Anarchists of Spain, through the C.N.T., are doing one of 
the biggest constructive jobs ever done by the working class. At the 
front they are fighting Fascism. Behind the front they are actually 
constructing the new workers’ society. They see that the war against 
Fascism and the carrying through of the social revolution are insepara¬ 
ble. Those who have seen them and understood what they are doing must 
honor them and be grateful to them. . . . That is surely the biggest 
thing which has hitherto been done by the workers in any part of 
the world. 

105. Cited by Richards, op . cit., pp. 76-81, where long descriptive 
quotations are given. 

106. See Hugh Thomas, “Anarchist Agrarian Collectives in the Span¬ 
ish Civil War” (note 59). He cites figures showing that agricultural pro¬ 
duction went up in Aragon and Castile, where collectivization was 
extensive, and down in Catalonia and the Levant, where peasant pro¬ 
prietors were the dominant element. 

Thomas’ is, to my knowledge, the only attempt by a professional 
historian to assess the data on agricultural collectivization in Spain in 
a systematic way. He concludes that the collectives were probably “a con¬ 
