the Western democracies and reaching their culmination in 

This is a revised version of a talk given at Harvard and published in 
Mosaic, June 1966. It appeared in substantially this form in the New York 
Review of Books , February 23, 1967. The present version is reprinted from 
Theodore Roszak, ed., The Dissenting Academy (New York, Pantheon Books* 
1968). 


323 







^ - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

Hiroshima and Nagasaki, surely among the most unspeakable 
crimes in history? To an undergraduate in 1945-1946—to any¬ 
one whose political and moral consciousness had been formed 
by the horrors of the 1930s, by the war in Ethiopia, the Russian 
purge, the “China incident,” the Spanish Civil War, the Nazi 
atrocities, the Western reaction to these events and, in part, 
complicity in them—these questions had particular significance 
and poignancy. 

With respect to the responsibility of intellectuals, there are 
still other, equally disturbing questions. Intellectuals are in a 
position to expose the lies of governments, to analyze actions 
according to their causes and motives and often hidden inten¬ 
tions. In the Western world at least, they have the power that 
comes from political liberty, from access to information and 
freedom of expression. For a privileged minority, Western 
democracy provides the leisure, the facilities, and the training 
to seek the truth lying hidden behind the veil of distortion and 
misrepresentation, ideology, and class interest through which 
the events of current history are presented to us. The responsi¬ 
bilities of intellectuals, then, are much deeper than what Mac¬ 
donald calls the “responsibility of peoples,” given the unique 
privileges that intellectuals enjoy. 

The issues that Macdonald raised are as pertinent today as 
they were twenty years ago. We can hardly avoid asking our¬ 
selves to what extent the American people bear responsibility 
for the savage American assault on a largely helpless rural pop¬ 
ulation in Vietnam, still another atrocity in what Asians see as 
the “Vasco da Gama era” of world history. As for those of us 
who stood by in silence and apathy as this catastrophe slowly 
took shape over the past dozen years, on what page of history 
do we find our proper place? Only the most insensible can 
escape these questions. I want to return to them, later on, after 


324 


The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


a few scattered remarks about the responsibility of intellectuals 
and how, in practice, they go about meeting this responsibility 
in the mid-1960s. 

It is the responsibility of intellectuals to speak the truth and 
to expose lies. This, at least, may seem enough of a truism to 
pass without comment. Not so, however. For the modern intel¬ 
lectual, it is not at all obvious. Thus we have Martin Heidegger 
writing, in a pro-Hitler declaration of 1933, that “truth is the 
revelation of that which makes a people certain, clear, and 
strong in its action and knowledge”; it is only this kind of 
“truth” that one has a responsibility to speak. Americans tend to 
be more forthright. When Arthur Schlesinger was asked by the 
New York Times , in November 1965, to explain the contradic¬ 
tion between his published account of the Bay of Pigs incident 
and the story he had given the press at the time of the attack, 
he simply remarked that he had lied; and a few days later, he 
went on to compliment the Times for also having suppressed 
information on the planned invasion, in “the national interest,” 
as this was defined by the group of arrogant and deluded men 
of whom Schlesinger gives such a flattering portrait in his re¬ 
cent account of the Kennedy administration. It is of no particu¬ 
lar interest that one man is quite happy to lie in behalf of a 
cause which he knows to be unjust; but it is significant that such 
events provoke so little response in the intellectual community 
—no feeling, for example, that there is something strange in the 
offer of a major chair in humanities to a historian who feels it to 
be his duty to persuade the world that an American-sponsored 
invasion of a nearby country is nothing of the sort. And what of 
the incredible sequence of lies on the part of our government 
and its spokesmen concerning such matters as negotiations in 
Vietnam? The facts are known to all who care to know. The 
press, foreign and domestic, has presented documentation to 


325 


*= AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 
