Furthermore, Schlesinger has no illusions about the character 
of the puppet regime in Saigon. He proposes, then, that we 
should “encourage a pro-peasant regime to come into exist¬ 
ence,” “a government which enlists enthusiastic popular support 
in the countryside. ,, He does not raise the question of how this 
is possible when the country is under American military occu¬ 
pation, or why one should expect the policy makers of the 
Kennedy-Johnson administrations to be capable of such a total 
reorientation of approach. But perhaps some light is shed on 
Schlesinger’s conception of democratic processes by his charac¬ 
terization of the 1966 elections in South Vietnam as that “val¬ 
iant try at self-government” which “excited such idealistic hopes 
in the United States.” He does not see fit to mention that in this 
valiant try at self-government, Communists and neutralists 
whose actions might be advantageous to the Communists were, 
by law, excluded from the ballot, nor does he comment on the 
conditions, reported widely in the press, under which cam¬ 
paigning and voting took place. In fact, his evaluation of this 
election recalls the remarks of his occasional adversary Dean 
Rusk, according to whom the provincial elections of May 1965 
“from our point of view . . . were free elections” (August 25, 
1965). Under the Rusk-Schlesinger concept of “free elections,” 
it is not unimaginable that “free elections” can be conducted 
under American military occupation. 

Schlesinger grants that the regime we have imposed in Viet¬ 
nam is that of “a new class of nouveaux mandarins,” that it is 
“pervaded by nepotism, corruption and cynicism,” and he 
admits that our military policy is simply one of devastating the 
land and annihilating the helpless population. One might sup¬ 
pose, then, that he would suggest American withdrawal. In fact, 
he says very little about this possibility, dismissing it out of 


306 



The Bitter Heritage 


hand because it “would have ominous reverberations through¬ 
out Asia,” because it would be “humiliating,” and because of 
our “moral obligations” to those whom we have supported and 
encouraged. The argument is hardly convincing. Our moral ob¬ 
ligations, such as they may be, can be met by resettling those 
whom Schlesinger describes as the “Frankenstein’s monsters 
we delight in creating in our client countries,” and their cohorts, 
say, in Arizona. The “humiliation” of withdrawal hardly com¬ 
pares with the national disgrace of a policy of scorched earth 
and mass murder. It is difficult to imagine anything more “omi¬ 
nous” for backward Asian countries than a permanent military 
presence of the sort we are rapidly constructing on the borders 
of China. Schlesinger’s “middle course” is one that, if successful, 
will leave the United States as dominant as it is in the Philip¬ 
pines, hardly an attractive prospect. If anything will lead this 
nation to “defile its oldest ideals and disgrace itself in the eyes 
of the world and its own posterity,” it is a willingness to tolerate 
any barbarism, so long as it can succeed, and to raise our twit¬ 
ters of protest only when total victory seems beyond our grasp. 


307 


SOME THOUGHTS ON 
INTELLECTUALS AND THE SCHOOLS 


In happier times, I would have liked to approach the topic of 
this symposium in a rather technical and professional way, ask¬ 
ing how students might best be exposed to the leading ideas 
and the most stimulating and penetrating thought in the fields 
that particularly interest me, how they might be helped to ex¬ 
perience the pleasures of discovery and of deepening insight 
and be given an opportunity to make their own individual con¬ 
tribution to contemporary culture. At this particular historical 
moment, however, there are other, more pressing matters. 

As I write, the radio is bringing the first reports of the bomb¬ 
ings of Hanoi and Haiphong. In itself, this is no atrocity by 
contemporary standards—surely no atrocity, for example, as 
compared with the American assault on the rural population of 

This essay was first printed in the Harvard Educational Review, Vol. 36 
(Fall 1966), pp. 484-91, in a spedal issue devoted to a symposium on the 
topic “American intellectuals and the schools.” Copyright © 1966 by the 
President and Fellows of Harvard College. 


309 







- AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

