

★= 

one’s mind. The slogan “From Dissent to Resistance” makes 
sense, I think, but I hope it is not taken to imply that dissent 
should cease. Dissent and resistance are not alternatives but 
activities that should reinforce each other. There is no reason 
why those who take part in tax refusal, draft resistance, and 
other forms of resistance should not also speak to church groups 
or town forums, or become involved in electoral politics to sup¬ 
port peace candidates or referenda on the war. In my experi¬ 
ence, it has often been those committed to resistance who have 
been most deeply involved in such attempts at persuasion. Put¬ 
ting aside the matter of resistance for a moment, I think it 
should be emphasized that the days of “patiently explain” are 
far from over. As the coffins come home and the taxes go up, 
many people who were previously willing to accept government 
propaganda will become increasingly concerned to try to think 
for themselves. The reasons for their change are unfortunate; 
the opportunities for educational activity are nevertheless very 
good. 

Furthermore, the recent shift in the government’s propa¬ 
ganda line offers important opportunities for critical analysis of 
the war. There is a note of shrill desperation in the recent 
defense of the American war in Vietnam. We hear less about 
“bringing freedom and democracy” to the South Vietnamese 
and more about the “national interest.” Secretary Rusk broods 
about the dangers posed to us by a billion Chinese; the Vice- 
President tells us that we are fighting “militant Asian Commu¬ 
nism” with “its headquarters in Peking” and adds that a Viet- 
cong victory would directly threaten the United States; Eugene 
Rostow argues that “it is no good building model cities if they 
are to be bombed in twenty years time,” and so on (all of this 
“a frivolous insult to the United States Navy,” as Walter Lipp- 
mann rightly commented). 


376 



On Resistance 


This shift in propaganda makes it much easier for critical 
analysis to attack the problem of Vietnam at its core, which is in 
Washington and Boston, not in Saigon and Hanoi. There is 
something ludicrous, after all, in the close attention that oppo¬ 
