
8. “Crisis in the World and in the Peace Movement,” Essays, pp. 465— 
78. 

9. “The Cold War and American Scholarship,” in Francis L. Loewen- 
heim, ed., The Historian and the Diplomat (New York, Harper & 
Row, Publishers, 1967), pp. 123-69. Morton goes on to develop the 
conventional view that the Soviet Union is solely to blame for the 
dimming of “the bright hopes for the future,” by “the subtle challenge 
of political subversion and economic penetration” (unthinkable to the 
West, of course), and by support of revolution, as in Greece, “in 
violation of allied wartime agreements that had placed Greece in the 
western sphere of interest.” As to the latter, he does not discuss the 
considerable evidence that indicates, rather, that Stalin was opposed to 
the Greek rebellion and adhered to the Churchill-Stalin settlement that 
divided Europe into spheres of influence. He also makes no mention of 
Truman’s statement, immediately after Nagasaki, that Bulgaria and 


209 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


Rumania, the two countries assigned predominantly to the Russian 
sphere in the Churchill-Stalin agreement, “are not to be spheres of 
influence of any one power.” Nor is there any reference to the Ameri¬ 
can role except as one of “containment.” In a review in the Political 
Science Quarterly, Vol. 82 (December 1967), Arthur Schlesinger de¬ 
scribes Morton's essay as “an always intelligent account of the role of 
history and historians in the era of the cold war,” which “will disap¬ 
point those looking for a Studies on the Left expose of the corruptions 
allegedly wrought in the writing of American history by the decision 
to oppose Communist aggression after 1945.” 

10. See Wesley F. Craven and James L. Cate, eds., The Army Air 
Forces in World War II (Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 
1953), Vol. 5, pp. 732-33: 

Arnold wanted as big a finale as possible, hoping that USASTAF 
could hit the Tokyo area in a 1,000-plane mission: the Twentieth Air 
Force had put up 853 B-29’s and 79 fighters on 1 August, and Arnold 
thought the number could be rounded out by calling on Doolittle's 
Eighth Air Force. Spaatz still wanted to drop the third atom bomb on 
Tokyo but thought that battered city a poor target for conventional 
bombing; instead, he proposed to divide his forces between seven targets. 
Arnold was apologetic about the unfortunate mixup on the 11th and, ac¬ 
cepting Spaatz’ amendment, assured him that his orders had been “co¬ 
ordinated with my superiors all the way to the top.” The teleconference 
ended with a fervid “Thank God” from Spaatz. . . . From the Marianas, 

449 B-29’s went out for a daylight strike on the 14th, and that night, 
with top officers standing by at Washington and Guam for a last- 
minute cancellation, 372 more were airborne. Seven planes dispatched 
on special bombing missions by the 509th Group brought the number 
of B-29’s to 828, and with 186 fighter escorts dispatched, USASTAF 
passed Arnold’s goal with a total of 1,014 aircraft. There were no 
losses, and before the last B-29 returned President Truman announced 
the unconditional surrender of Japan. 

For the reaction of a victim, see Makoto Oda, “The Meaning of 
‘Meaningless Death. 5 ” Tenbo, January 1965, translated in the Journal 
of Social and Political Ideas in Japan , Vol. 4 (August 1966), pp. 75-84. 

In the afternoon of August 14, 1945, thousands of people died during 
a protracted and intensive aerial bombardment of an arsenal in Osaka. 

I was a witness to the tragedy. I saw dozens of corpses—loyal subjects 
literally consumed by service to a government which had already 

210 


The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Must* 


decided to accept the Potsdam Declaration’s demand for unconditional 
surrender. The only reason these people died was because they hap¬ 
pened to have been in the arsenal or environs at the time of the air 
raid. After what seemed an eternity of terror and anguish, we who 
were fortunate enough to survive emerged from our shelters. We found 
the corpses—and the leaflets which American bombers had dropped 
over the destruction. The leaflets proclaimed in Japanese, “Your 
Government has surrendered. The war is over!” 

11. Radhabinod Pal, International Military Tribunal for the Far East 
(Calcutta, Sanyal and Co., 1953), pp. 620-21. 

12. Paul Schroeder, The Axis Alliance and J apanese-American Rela¬ 
tions (Ithaca, N.Y., Cornell University Press, 1958), p. 87. 

13. Ibid., p. 7. 

14. Japan’s Quest for Autonomy: National Security and Foreign Pol¬ 
icy, 1930-1938 (Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press, 1966), 
Ch. 1. 
