in overgeneralizing, but neither history nor psychology nor 
sociology gives us any particular reason to look forward with 
hope to the rule of the new mandarins. 

In general, one would expect any group with access to power 
and affluence to construct an ideology that will justify this state 
of affairs on grounds of the general welfare. For just this reason, 
Bell’s thesis that intellectuals are moving closer to the center of 

2T 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


power, or at least being absorbed more fully into the decision¬ 
making structure, is to some extent supported by the phenome¬ 
non of counterrevolutionary subordination noted earlier. That 
is, one might anticipate that as power becomes more accessible, 
the inequities of the society will recede from vision, the status 
quo will seem less flawed, and the preservation of order will 
become a matter of transcendent importance. The fact is that 
American intellectuals are increasingly achieving the status of a 
doubly privileged elite: first, as American citizens, with respect 
to the rest of the world; and second, because of their role in 
American society, which is surely quite central, whether or not 
Bell's prediction proves accurate. In such a situation, the dan¬ 
gers of counterrevolutionary subordination, in both the domes¬ 
tic and the international arena, are apparent. I think that 
O’Brien is entirely correct in pointing to the necessity for “in¬ 
creased and specific vigilance” towards the danger of counter¬ 
revolutionary subordination, of which, as he correctly remarks, 
“we hear almost nothing.” I would like to devote this essay to a 
number of examples. 

Several years ago it was enthusiastically proclaimed that “the 
fundamental political problems of the industrial revolution have 
been solved,” and that “this very triumph of democratic social 
evolution in the West ends domestic politics for those intel¬ 
lectuals who must have ideologies or utopias to motivate them 
to social action.” 9 During this period of faith in “the end of 
ideology,” even enlightened and informed commentators were 
inclined to present the most remarkable evaluations of the state 
of American society. Daniel Bell, for example, wrote that “in 
the mass consumption economy all groups can easily acquire 
the outward badges of status and erase the visible demarca¬ 
tions.” 10 Writing in Commentary in October 1964, he main- 


28 
