the only nation that did not have a Communist insurrection 
within its borders and it was the only country that remained 
relatively stable and calm. As the United States considered 
measures to deter Communist aggression in Southeast Asia, a 
conservative and anti-Communist regime in Thailand became 
increasingly attractive regardless of its internal policies or 
methods of achieving power.” Phibun got the point. In August 
1949, “he stated that foreign pressure had become ‘alarming’ 
and that internal Communist activity had ‘vigorously in¬ 
creased.’ ” In 1950, Truman approved a $10 million grant for 
military aid. 

The new rulers made use of the substantial American military 
aid to convert the political system into “a more powerful and 
ruthless form of authoritarianism,” and to develop an extensive 
system of corruption, nepotism, and profiteering that helped 
maintain the loyalty of their followers. At the same time, 
“American corporations moved in, purchasing large quantities 
of rubber and tin . . . shipments of raw materials now went 
directly to the United States instead of through Hong Kong and 
Singapore.” 41 By 1958, “the United States purchased 90 per 
cent of Thailand’s rubber and most of its tin.” American in¬ 
vestment, however, remained low, because of the political in- 


62 



Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


stability as well as “the problems caused by more extensive 
public ownership and economic planning.” To improve matters, 
the Sarit dictatorship (see below) introduced tax benefits and 
guarantees against nationalization and competition from gov¬ 
ernment-owned commercial enterprises, and finally banned 
trade with China and abolished all monopolies, government or 
private, “in an attempt to attract private foreign capital.” 

American influence gave “material and moral support” to the 
Phibun dictatorship and “discouraged the political opposition.” 
It strengthened the executive power and “encouraged the mili¬ 
tary leaders to take even stronger measures in suppressing local 
opposition, using the excuse that all anti-government activity 
was Communist-inspired.” In 1954, Pridi Phanomyong, a liberal 
intellectual who had been the major participant in the over¬ 
throw of the absolute monarchy in 1932, had led the Free Thai 
underground during the war, and had been elected in 1946 
when Thai democracy reached “an all-time high,” appeared in 
Communist China; the United States was supporting Phibun, 
“who had been an ally of the Japanese, while Pridi, who had 
courageously assisted the OSS, was in Peking cooperating with 
the Chinese Communists.” This was “ironic.” 

It is difficult to imagine what sort of development towards a 
constitutional, parliamentary system might have taken place 
had it not been for American-supported subversion. The liberals 
were extremely weak in any event, in particular because of the 
domination of the economy by Western and Chinese enterprises 
linked with the corrupt governmental bureaucracy. The Coup 
Group that had overthrown the government “was composed 
almost entirely of commoners, many of whom had come from 
the peasantry or low-ranking military and civil service families,” 
and who now wanted their share in corruption and authori¬ 
tarian control. The opposition “Democrats” were, for the most 


63 


* - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

part, “members of the royal family or conservative landowners 
who wanted to preserve their role in the government and their 
personal wealth.” Whatever opportunities might have existed 
for the development of some more equitable society disap¬ 
peared once the American presence became dominant, how¬ 
ever. Surely any Thai liberal reformer must have been aware of 
this by 1950, in the wake of the coups, the farcical rigged elec¬ 
tions, the murder and torture of leaders of the Free Thai anti- 
Japanese underground, the takeover by the military of the polit¬ 
ical and much of the commercial system—particularly when he 
listened to the words of American Ambassador Stanton as he 
signed a new aid agreement: “The American people fully sup¬ 
port this program of aid to Thailand because of their deep 
interest in the Thai people whose devotion to the ideals of 
freedom and liberty and wholehearted support of the UN have 
won the admiration of the American people.” 

“A notable trend throughout this period was the growing 
intimacy between the Thai military leaders and the top-level 
military officials from the United States,” who helped them ob¬ 
tain “large-scale foreign aid which in turn bolstered their polit¬ 
ical power.” The head of the American military mission, Colo¬ 
nel Charles Sheldon, stated that Thailand was “threatened by 
armed aggression by people who do not believe in democracy, 
who do not believe in freedom or the dignity of the individual 
man as do the people of Thailand and my country.” Adlai Ste¬ 
venson, in 1953, warned the Thai leaders “that their country 
