of all strata of people, nationalities, political parties, religious 
communities, and patriotic personalities” (see Kahin and Lewis, 
U.S. in Vietnam , Appendix 6-B). 

Similarly, it is a deception to assert blandly, as Schlesinger 


303 


- AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

does, that “Hanoi has put such stress on the withdrawal ol 
American troops as a condition precedent to negotiation,” in the 
face of the frequent insistence from Hanoi that the demand for 
withdrawal is put forth as “a basis” for negotiations. 

Jean Lacouture commented in Le Nouvel Observateur, Jan¬ 
uary 1967, that United States government officials are the last 
people on earth who are unaware of the fundamental elements 
of the XLF program of 1962. He might have added that Arthur 
Schlesinger seems the last person on earth to be unaware of the 
negotiation position of Hanoi and the NLF (stated, for exam¬ 
ple, by Premier Pham Van Dong; cf. New York Times, April 14, 
1965), that recognition of the famous four points as “a basis” 
for a political settlement will create “favorable conditions” for 
such a settlement and make it “possible to consider the recon¬ 
vening of an international conference along the pattern of the 
1954 Geneva Conference on Vietnam.” Neither then nor since 
has withdrawal of American troops been demanded as a pre¬ 
condition for negotiations. 

Thus Schlesinger’s “middle course” appears to differ from the 
approach of the Joint Chiefs and the State Department only in 
tactical emphasis. All accept the assumption that dispatch of an 
American expeditionary force of half a million men to take over 
the conduct of the war is defense of the interests of the South 
Vietnamese, whereas infiltration from the North is an aggressive 
attack on South Vietnam. In Schlesinger’s case, this assumption 
takes the form of a proposal that the guerrillas capitulate, after 
which we will grant them political rights. Analogously, the Pres¬ 
ident and his spokesmen put forth the cynical demand that the 
North Vietnamese restrict or terminate their activities in the 
South without any compensating gesture on our side in South 
Vietnam. This same assumption takes its most ludicrous form 
when a State Department spokesman refers to resupply efforts 


304 


The Bitter Heritage 


by the North Vietnamese during the Tet truce as “extra evi¬ 
dence that they were not sincere in their statement on negotia¬ 
tions,” while maintaining that United States logistic operations 
carried out during the truce period were different because they 
“did not send men and supplies across the border into North 
Vietnam but were in South Vietnam only” ( New York Times, 
February 17, 1967). To go back to earlier precedents, it is the 
same attitude that permits Schlesinger (in his A Thousand 
Days) to express his horror at the discovery of Cuban arms 
cached in Venezuela, but to think nothing of the extensive 
American military aid that has been used to institute or support 
repressive regimes throughout the continent. The underlying 
assumption is that the United States does have a warrant “to 
take upon itself to prescribe what shall be the terms and condi¬ 
tions of a ‘new order’ in areas not under its sovereignty and to 
constitute itself the repository of authority and the agent of 
destiny in regard thereto.” 

Every competent observer has pointed out that “the war in 
South Vietnam has been between the large, professionally 
trained army of an unpopular government and the amateur 
military wing of a strong, nationalistically based political move¬ 
ment in which the Communists have formed the spearhead” 
(Michael Field, The Prevailing Wind). For this reason, the 
Saigon authorities have never wavered from their demand, ex¬ 
pressed in a statement of March 1, 1965, that negotiations are 
unthinkable unless the “Communists” show their sincerity “by 
withdrawing beforehand their armed units and their political 
cadres from South Vietnamese territory” (italics mine). The 
demand is appropriate; by their own repeated admission, the 
Saigon authorities have no hope of maintaining themselves in 
an open political arena. It is hardly necessary to document the 
fact that this has been the dominant American position as well, 


305 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


in effect, as Schlesinger himself emphasizes. 

