in Vietnam, as in the Philippines and Latin America, our efforts 
are directed to organizing (or restructuring) the society so as to 
ensure the domination of those elements that will enter into 
partnership with us. That we should do so is not surprising, 
surely not to anyone who is familiar with the history of impe¬ 
rialism. What is extraordinary is that at this late date we should 
act with so little awareness of what we are doing, that we still 
find it possible to deceive ourselves, though few others, 62 with 
the classical rhetoric of long-decayed imperialism. 

Before continuing with this sketch of American reactions to 
the war in Vietnam, I would like to cite another American 
military source, which gives much insight into the nature of the 
Vietcong success in the face of the titanic military force with 
which we have attempted to batter it to the ground: 

The success of this unique system of war depends upon almost 
complete unity of action of the entire native population. That 
such unity is a fact is too obvious to admit of discussion; how it 
is brought about and maintained is not so plain. Intimidation has 
undoubtedly accomplished much to this end, but fear as the only 
motive is hardly sufficient to account for the united and appar¬ 
ently spontaneous action of several millions of people. One traitor 
252 



The Logic of Withdrawal 


in each town would effectually destroy such a complex organiza¬ 
tion. 

This assessment is from a United States War Department 
report, in the year 1900; the author is Major General Arthur 
MacArthur, and he is commenting, of course, on the campaign 
to suppress the Philippine war of national liberation, then ac¬ 
tively in progress. These remarks are perfectly apropos today. I 
quote them to dispel the thought that Vietnam is merely a 
unique aberration, a blunder, merely a result of “the politics of 
inadvertence,” without roots in our history and without signifi¬ 
cance for the future. 

There is of course a sense in which the liberal critics are correct 
when they refer to the Vietnam war as an “aberration.” In Viet¬ 
nam, we lost control. The Vietnamese refused to play the game 
the way they were expected to when the war was simulated on 
the RAND Corporation computers. They did not realize that 
they were supposed to yield when the pressure reached a certain 
point. Therefore, we were forced to escalate beyond any reason¬ 
