the American presence in Vietnam.” Furthermore, these nasty 
types are often psychologists, mathematicians, chemists, or 
philosophers (just as, incidentally, those most vocal in protest in 
the Soviet Union are generally physicists, literary intellectuals, 
and others remote from the exercise of power), rather than 
people with Washington contacts, who of course realize that 
“had they a new, good idea about Vietnam, they would get a 
prompt and respectful hearing” in Washington. 

I am not interested here in whether Kristol’s characterization 
of protest and dissent is accurate, but rather in the assumptions 
that it expresses with respect to such questions as these: Is the 
purity of American motives a matter that is beyond discussion, 
or that is irrelevant to discussion? Should decisions be left to 
“experts” w T ith Washington contacts—that is, even if w T e assume 
that they command the necessary knowledge and principles to 
make the “best” decision, will they invariably do so? And, a 
logically prior question, is “expertise” applicable—that is, is 


334 


The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


there a body of theory and of relevant information, not in the 
public domain, that can be applied to the analysis of foreign 
policy or that demonstrates the correctness of present actions in 
some way that the psychologists, mathematicians, chemists, and 
philosophers are incapable of comprehending? Although Kristol 
does not examine these questions directly, his attitudes presup¬ 
pose answers, answers which are wrong in all cases. American 
aggressiveness, however it may be masked in pious rhetoric, is a 
dominant force in world affairs and must be analyzed in terms 
of its causes and motives. There is no body of theory or signifi¬ 
cant body of relevant information, beyond the comprehension 
of the layman, which makes policy immune from criticism. To 
the extent that “expert knowledge” is applied to world affairs, it 
is surely appropriate—for a person of any integrity, quite neces¬ 
sary—to question its quality and the goals that it serves. These 
facts seem too obvious to require extended discussion. 

A corrective to Kristol’s curious belief in the administration’s 
openness to new thinking about Vietnam is provided by Mc- 
George Bundy in a recent article. 21 As Bundy correctly ob¬ 
serves, “on the main stage ... the argument on Viet Nam turns 
on tactics, not fundamentals,” although, he adds, “there are 
wild men in the wings.” On stage center are, of course, the 
President (who in his recent trip to Asia had just “magisterially 
