bombings and massacres, as well as razing forests and bulldozing 
villages”—all under the paternalistic guidance of the American “ad¬ 
visers.” The American press has yet to cover these events. In general, 
the failure of the press to report events in Latin America is scandal¬ 
ous. The coverage of Latin American events in Le Monde is greater in 
scope (and incomparably greater in depth) than anything to be found 
in the American press, which, like American scholarship, is little con¬ 
cerned with American-directed violence in other countries so long as it 
is reasonably successful. 

The quoted statement of the Guatemalan Vice-President would very 
likely cause something of a commotion in liberal circles were it to be 
published in the American press. However, hardly an eyebrow would be 
raised at other parts of Niedergang’s report, for example, these lines: 
““According to M. Antonio Palacios, of the Bank of Guatemala, ‘two 
thirds of the population live in a primitive manner; the infant mortal¬ 
ity rate is frightful.’ 70 percent of those under 20 have never been to 
school; the average life expectancy is scarcely more than 40 years; 
hunger and lack of hygiene are a veritable scourge; innumerable 
clandestine distilleries produce a fiery brandy called ‘guaro,’ maintain¬ 
ing a destructive alcoholism; 80 percent of doctors practice in the 
capital; outside begins the rule of the ‘sorceror’ and the incantations 
which combine Christianity and the Mayan tradition. Finally, there is 
83 percent illiteracy, one of the highest proportions in all of Latin 
America.” 

Recall that in 1954 the people of Guatemala were taking some 
small steps towards extricating themselves from this torment. 

59. A picture suggested, for example, in the crabbed and involuted 
arguments of Martin Heidegger, who, lecturing in 1935, saw Germany 
as “the nation with the most neighbors and hence the most endan¬ 
gered” by the “great pincers,” by the “world character” represented in 
its crudest form in Russia and America, where “the domination ... of 
a cross section of the indifferent mass has become ... an active 
onslaught that destroys all rank and every world-creating impulse of 


286 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


the spirit” ( Introduction to Metaphysics , trans. Ralph Manheim, [New 
Haven, Conn., Yale University Press, 1959], pp. 45-46). Ger¬ 
many, “the most metaphysical of nations,” must forestall “the peril of 
world darkening,” and, standing “in the center of the Western world,” 
must “take on its historical mission.” “If the great decision regarding 
Europe is not to bring annihilation, that decision must be made in 
terms of new spiritual energies unfolding historically from out of the 
center,” that is, Germany—in 1935. To Heidegger, in 1935, the cul¬ 
tural mission of Germany is to recapture and advance the “supreme 
possibility of human being, as fashioned by the Greeks”—which is 
quite natural, since along with Greek, “the German language is (in 
regard to its possibilities for thought) at once the most powerful and 
most spiritual of all languages” (p. 57). Compare Thomas Mann, who 
left Germany in 1933 because he could not, as “a German writer, 
made responsible through his habitual use of language, remain silent, 
quite silent, in the face of all the irreparable evil which has been 
committed daily, and is being committed in my country, against body, 
soul and spirit, against justice and truth, against men and man” 
(quoted in George Steiner, Language and Silence [New York, Atheneum 
Publishers, 1967], p. 102). 

60. James Reston, New York Times, November 24, 1967. Reston 
does not question that it is “in defending this doctrine” that men are 
dying in Vietnam, that this “principle” is in fact what motivates Wash¬ 
ington; but he admits that in the “profound spiritual bewilderment” 
caused by the immense destruction, it is becoming difficult “to believe 
in the cause.” A few days earlier (November 15), he had mused on 
one of the great “mysteries and tragedies in Vietnam,” “the Hanoi 
Government’s continuing refusal to talk about a negotiated settle¬ 
ment.” The reason for this “continuing refusal” (which will come as a 
surprise to those who have been reading the news columns of the 
Times for the past three years) is, he feels, that “Ho Chi Minh and his 
associates simply cannot believe that the U.S. would make such sacri¬ 
fices of men and treasure simply to defend the principle of opposing 
military aggression—and then withdraw when the principle is sus¬ 
tained”; Reston is convinced that “President Johnson is perfectly sin¬ 
cere” in “his offers to make peace and withdraw.” 

61. Thruston Morton, who inserted the IVS statement “Vietnam: An 
Inside View,” from which quotations follow, in the Congressional 
Record, December 13, 1967, S18499. Senator Morton himself became 

287 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


disillusioned about the war because our “present military operations” 
appear to be failing “to win the hearts and minds of the Vietnamese.” 
We cannot succeed in this goal, he feels, when “at least one-third of 
the total population of Vietnam are refugees who have been driven 
from their land and their homes by U.S. military action.” What is 
remarkable is that he reacts to this atrocity by raising questions about 
whether we can succeed, and that he nowhere questions the legitimacy 
of our attempt to win their hearts and minds. 
