administrators through the Hsueh-ho-hui, the government- 
sponsored organization to recruit mass support for the Man- 
chukuo regime” (p. 46). Many abuses at the village level were 
also eliminated, in an attempt to wean the villagers from their 
traditional belief that the government is merely an agency of 
exploitation. Extensive propaganda efforts were conducted to 
win the hearts and minds of the villagers (cf. pp. 55 f.). In 
comparison with American efforts at pacification, the Japanese 
appear to have achieved considerable success—if these docu¬ 
ments can be believed—in part, apparently, because Japan was 
not committed to guaranteeing the persistence of the old semi- 
feudal order and was less solicitous of property rights. The 
reports indicate that by 1940, the Communist guerrillas had 
been virtually exterminated in Manchuria. 

A secret report of the office of information of the government 
of Manchukuo in April 1939 describes the achievements of 
pacification in Tunghwa Province in glowing terms: 

It must be said that the economic and spiritual impact of the 
reconstruction activities on the citizens of the province has been 
very uplifting. We have observed an increase in the areas under 
cultivation as a result of the recovery of abandoned lands; an 
increase in agricultural production owing to improvements in 

199 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


seeds; an increase of farmers’ cash incomes as a result of im¬ 
provement in market facilities; remarkable progress among mer¬ 
chants and industrialists assisted by government loans; and the 
winning of public support through medical treatment and the 
administration of medicine. 82 

A secret report of November 1939 describes the situation in a 
province where “revolutionary development” was not yet quite 
so successful and insurgents still operated: 

. . . most atrociously, these insurgents pillage goods, and kill and 
wound men and animals. They are also systematically conducting 
Communist indoctrination operations in various villages. As a 
result, many villagers are led astray by the insurgents’ propa¬ 
ganda and begin to work for the insurgents, passively or politi¬ 
cally. All this adds to the burden carried by the pacification 
forces. 83 
