
The 1936 IPR conference continues the story. Writing on 
“trade and trade rivalry between the United States and Japan,” 
William W. Lockwood observes that American preponderance 
in Philippine trade “is attributable in large degree to the Closed 
Door policy of the United States, which has established Ameri¬ 
can products in a preferential position. Were Japanese business 
men able to compete on equal terms, there is no doubt but that 
Japan’s share of the trade would advance rapidly.” 62 At the 
same time, American tariffs on many Japanese items exceeded 
100 percent. 

Japan did not have the resiliency to absorb such a serious 
shock to its economy. The textile industry, which was hit most 
severely by the discriminatory policies of the major imperialist 
powers, produced nearly half of the total value of manufac¬ 
tured goods and about two thirds of the value of Japanese 
exports, and employed about half of the factory workers. 
Though industrialized by Asian standards, Japan had only 
about one seventh the energy capacity per capita of Germany; 
from 1927 to 1932, its pig-iron production was 44 percent that 
of Luxemburg and its steel production about 95 percent. 63 It 
was in no position to tolerate a situation in which India, Malaya, 
Indochina, and the Philippines erected tariff barriers favoring 

191 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


the mother country, and could not survive the deterioration in 
its very substantial trade with the United States and the sharp 
decline in the China trade. It w T as, in fact, being suffocated by 
the American and British and other Western imperial systems, 
which quickly abandoned their lofty liberal rhetoric as soon as 
the shoe began to pinch. 

The situation as of 1936 is summarized as follows by Neu¬ 
mann: 

When an effort to set a quota on imports of bleached and colored 
cotton cloths failed, President Roosevelt finally took direct action. 

In May of 1936 he invoked the flexible provision of the tariff law 
and ordered an average increase of 42 percent in the duty on 
these categories of imports. By this date Japan’s cotton goods had 
begun to suffer from restrictive measures taken by more than half 
of their other markets. Japanese xenophobia was further stimu¬ 
lated as tariff barriers [rose] against Japanese goods, like earlier 
barriers against Japanese immigrants, and presented a convincing 
picture of western encirclement. The most secure markets were 
those which Japan could control politically; an argument for 
further political expansion . . . against an iron ring of tariffs. 64 

It is hardly astonishing, then, that in 1937 Japan again began to 
expand at the expense of China. From the Japanese point of 
view, the new government of North China established in 1937 
represented the intention of the Japanese to keep North China 
independent of Nanking and the interest of the Chinese op¬ 
posed to colonization of the North by the dictatorial Kuomin- 
tang. 65 On December 22, 1938, Prince Konoye made the fol¬ 
lowing statement: 

. . . Japan demands that China, in accordance with the principle 
of equality between the two countries, should recognize the free¬ 
dom of residence and trade on the part of Japanese subjects in 
the interior of China, with a view to promoting the economic 
interests of both peoples; and that, in the light of the historical 


192 


The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


and economic relations between the two nations, China should 
extend to Japan facilities for the development of China’s natural 
resources, especially in the regions of North China and Inner 
Mongolia. 66 

There were to be no annexations, no indemnities. Thus a new 
order was to be established, which would defend China and 
Japan against Western imperialism, unequal treaties, and ex¬ 
traterritoriality. Its goal was not enrichment of Japan, but 
rather cooperation (on Japanese terms, of course). Japan would 
provide capital and technical assistance; at the same time, it 
would succeed in freeing itself from dependence on the West 
for strategic raw materials. 

Japanese leaders repeatedly made clear that they intended no 
territorial aggrandizement. To use the contemporary idiom,, 
they emphasized that their actions were “not intended as a 
threat to China” and that “China knows that Japan does not 
want a wider war,” although, of course, they would “do every¬ 
thing they can to protect the men they have there.” 67 They 
were quite willing to negotiate with the recalcitrant Chinese 
authorities, and even sought third-power intervention. 68 Such 
Japanese leaders as To jo and Matsuoka emphasized that no 
