one, surely, could accuse Japan of seeking mere economic gain. 
In fact, she was spending more on the war in China than she 
could possibly gain in return. Japan was “paying the price that 
leadership of Asia demands,” they said, attempting “to prevent 
Asia from becoming another Africa and to preserve China from 
Communism.” 69 The latter was a particularly critical matter. 
“The Japanese felt that the United Front and the Sino-Soviet 
pact of 1937 were steps toward the destruction of Nationalist 
China and the Bolshevization of East Asia.” 70 The Japanese 
were, furthermore, quite willing to withdraw their troops once 

193 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


the “illegal acts” by Communists and other lawless elements 
were terminated, 71 and the safety and rights of Japanese and 
Korean residents in China guaranteed. 

Such terminology was drawn directly from the lexicon of 
Western diplomacy. For example, Secretary of State Kellogg 
had stated United States government policy as: “to require 
China to perform the obligations of a sovereign state in the 
protection of foreign citizens and their property” (September 2, 
1925). The Washington Treaty powers were “prepared to con¬ 
sider the Chinese government's proposal for the modification of 
existing treaties in measure as the Chinese authorities demon¬ 
strated their willingness and ability to fulfill their obligations 
and to assume the protection of foreign rights and interests now 
safeguarded by the exceptional provisions of those treaties,” 
and admonished China of “the necessity of giving concrete evi¬ 
dence of its ability and willingness to enforce respect for the 
safety of foreign lives and property and to suppress disorders 
and anti-foreign agitations” as a precondition for the carrying 
on of negotiations over the unequal treaties (notes of Septem¬ 
ber 4, 1925). 72 Because of this “inability and unwillingness,” 
“none of the Treaty of Washington signatories gave effect to the 
treaty with respect to extra-territorial rights, intervening in in¬ 
ternal Chinese affairs, tariffs, courts, etc., on grounds that their 
interests were prejudiced by lawlessness and the ineffectiveness 
of the government of China.” 73 

In 1940, Japan established a puppet government in Nanking 
under the leadership of Wang Ching-wei, who had been a 
leading disciple of Sun Yat-sen and, through the 1930s, a major 
figure in the Kuomintang. Its attempt to establish order in 
China was vain, however, as the United Front continued to 
resist—in the Japanese view, solely because of outside assist¬ 
ance from the Western imperialist powers. Japan was bogged 


194 


The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


down in an unwinnable war on the Asian mainland. The policy 
of “crushing blow—generous peace” was failing, because of the 
foreign support for the “local authority” of Chiang Kai-shek, 
while Japan’s real enemy, the Soviet Union, was expanding its 
economic and military power. 74 How familiar it all sounds. 

With all of the talk about benevolence and generosity, it is 
doubtful that Japanese spokesmen ever surpassed the level of 
fatuity that characterizes much of American scholarship, which 
often seems mired in the rhetoric of a Fourth of July address. 
For example, Willard Thorp describes American policy in these 
terms: “. . . we do not believe in exploitation, piracy, imperial¬ 
ism or war-mongering. In fact, we have used our wealth to help 
other countries and our military strength to defend the inde¬ 
pendence of small nations” 75 (in the manner indicated in note 
62, for example). Many similar remarks might be cited, but it is 
depressing to continue. 

A wave of revulsion swept through the world as the brutality 
of the Japanese attack on China became known. When notified 
of the intention of the Japanese government to bomb Nanking, 
the United States responded as follows: “The Government is of 
the opinion that any bombardment of an extensive zone con¬ 
taining a sizeable population engaged in their peaceful pursuits 
is inadmissible and runs counter to the principles of law and 
humanity.” 76 Now that these principles have been repealed, it 
is difficult to recapture the feeling of horror at the events them¬ 
selves and of contempt for those who had perpetrated them. 
For an American today to describe these events in the manner 
they deserve would be the ultimate in hypocrisy. For this rea¬ 
son I will say very little about them. 

In Manchuria, the Japanese conducted a fairly successful 
counterinsurgency operation, beginning in 1931. 77 The record 
is instructive. In 1932, 


195 



