

AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


Whereas Jackson attributes the ebbing of the revolutionary 
tide to the discovery of the unsuspected complexity of modern 
society, Orwell’s firsthand observations, like those of Borkenau, 
suggest a far simpler explanation. What calls for explanation is 
not the disaffection of the workers of Barcelona but the curious 
constructions of the historian. 

Let me repeat, at this point, Jackson’s comments regarding 
Juan Comorera: Comorera “immediately took steps to end 
barter and requisitioning, and became a defender of the peas¬ 
ants against the revolution”; he “ended requisitions, restored 
money payments, and protected the Catalan peasants against 
further collectivization.” These comments imply that the peas¬ 
antry of Catalonia was, as a body, opposed to the revolution 
and that Comorera put a stop to the collectivization that they 
feared. Jackson nowdiere indicates any divisions among the 
peasantry on this issue and offers no support for the implied 
claim that collectivization w r as in process at the period of 
Comorera’s access to power. In fact, it is questionable that 
Comorera’s rise to power affected the course of collectivization 
in Catalonia. Evidence is difficult to come by, but it seems that 
collectivization of agriculture in Catalonia was not, in any 
event, extensive, and that it was not extending in December, 
when Comorera took office. We know from anarchist sources 
that there had been instances of forced collectivization in Cata¬ 
lonia, 91 but I can find no evidence that Comorera “protected 
the peasantry” from forced collectivization. Furthermore, it is 
misleading, at best, to imply that the peasantry as a whole was 
opposed to collectivization. A more accurate picture is pre¬ 
sented by Bolloten (p. 56), who points out that “if the indi¬ 
vidual farmer viewed with dismay the swift and widespread 
development of collectivized agriculture, the farm workers of 
the Anarchosyndicalist CNT and the Socialist UGT saw in it, 


96 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


on the contrary, the commencement of a new era.” In short, 
there was a complex class struggle in the countryside, though 
one learns little about it from Jackson’s oversimplified and mis¬ 
leading account. It would seem fair to suppose that this distor¬ 
