weapons and conventional ground troops can succeed where counter¬ 
insurgency has failed. In fact, there is some evidence of popular resent¬ 
ment to the expanding use of napalm, a development which is not sur¬ 
prising if one has observed a hospital ward full of bleeding women and 
children seared from head to toe.” While Mr. Ross and Senator Proxmire 
may await the evidence, others will draw their own conclusions, even be¬ 
fore the inevitable study by the RAND Corporation. 

56. Excerpts from his secret testimony appear in the New York 
Times, February 2, 1968. The Vietcong will be happy to learn, from 
his testimony, that we do not “seek the surrender of Vietcong forces; 
we would be content to see them lay down their arms and take their 
place as peaceful citizens of South Vietnam, or move to the North if 
they so desire.” Presumably, the distinction between “surrendering” 
and “laying down one’s arms” is explained in the censored part of the 
testimony. 

The remark recalls that of another leading dove, Arthur Goldberg, 
who announced our position before the United Nations, in what was 
widely described as a “conciliatory” statement, as being: “No military 
forces, armed personnel or bases [are] to be maintained in North or 
South Vietnam except those under the control of the respective gov¬ 
ernments” (New York Times, September 22, 1967). The Vietcong, in 
other words, need not surrender; we ask only that it go out of exist¬ 
ence as a military force. And when the government we have instituted 
establishes total military control, we will have no further interest in 
retaining our army in Vietnam. The German High Command could 
have outlined its goals in France in just the same terms. 

57. Lyndon B. Johnson, Congressional Record , March 15, 1948, House, 
p. 2883. 

58. Marcel Niedergang in Le Mofide hebdomadaire, January 18-24, 
1968. The same speech was cited by Hugh O’Shaughnessy in the New 
Statesman, December 1, 1967, who goes on to say that “similar things 

285 - 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


are happening in Nicaragua, which is virtually a U.S. colony and 
where guerrilla warfare broke out this year.” In the Nation, February 
5, 1968, pp. 166-67, Norman Diamond reports on the application in 
Guatemala of “advanced techniques in counterinsurgency being devel¬ 
oped in Vietnam,” including heavy bombing in large areas of the 
country, “pacification,” even rerouting of rivers “to cover the traces of 
