
Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


“would welcome and aid a genuine Hitler of peace and toleration” 
(see New York Times , December 12, 1965). 

100. I find no mention at all in Hugh Thomas, The Spanish Civil 
War. The account here is largely taken from Broue and Temime, pp. 
279-80. 

101. Op cit., p. 405. A footnote comments on the “leniency” of the 
government to those arrested. Jackson has nothing to say about the 
charges against Ascaso and others, or the manner in which the old 
order was restored in Aragon. 

To appreciate these events more fully, one should consider, by com¬ 
parison, the concern for civil liberties shown by Negrin on the sec¬ 
ond, antifascist front. In an interview after the war he explained to 
John Whitaker (We Cannot Escape History [New York, The Macmil¬ 
lan Company, 1943], pp. 116-18) why his government had been so 
ineffective in coping with the fifth column, even in the case of known 
fascist agents. Negrin explained that “we couldn’t arrest a man on 
suspicion; we couldn’t break with the rules of evidence. You can’t risk 
arresting an innocent man because you are positive in your own mind 
that he is guilty. You prosecute a war, yes; but you also live with your 
conscience.” Evidently, these scruples did not pertain when it was the 
rights of anarchist and socialist workers, rather than fascist agents, 
that were at stake. 

102. Cf. Broue and Temime, p. 262. Ironically, the government forces 
included some anarchist troops, the only ones to enter Barcelona. 

103. See Bolloten, op. cit., p. 55, n. 1, for an extensive list of sources. 

104. Broue and Temime cite the socialists Alardo Prats, Fenner 
Brockway, and Carlo Rosselli. Borkenau, on the other hand, suspected 
that the role of terror was great in collectivization. He cites very little 
to substantiate his feeling, though some evidence is available from 
anarchist sources. See note 91 above. 

Some general remarks on collectivization by Rosselli and Brockway 
are cited by Rudolf Rocker in his essay “Anarchism and Anarcho- 
syndicalism,” n. 1, in Paul Eltzbacher, ed., Anarchism (London, Free¬ 
dom Press, 1960), p. 266: 

Rosselli: In three months Catalonia has been able to set up a new 
social order on the ruins of an ancient system. This is chiefly due to the 
Anarchists, who have revealed a quite remarkable sense of proportion, 
realistic understanding, and organizing ability. ... All the revolutionary 
forces of Catalonia have united in a program of Syndicalist-Socialist 


149 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


character . . . Anarcho-Syndicalism, hitherto so despised, has revealed 
itself as a great constructive force. I am no Anarchist, but I regard it 
as my duty to express here my opinion of the Anarchists of Catalonia, 
who have all too often been represented as a destructive if not a 
criminal element. 

Brockway: I was impressed by the strength of the C.N.T. It was un¬ 
necessary to tell me that it is the largest and most vital of the working 
class organizations in Spain. That was evident on all sides. The large 
industries were clearly in the main in the hands of the C.N.T.—rail¬ 
ways, road transport, shipping, engineering, textiles, electricity, building, 
agriculture. ... I was immensely impressed by the constructive revolu¬ 
tionary work which is being done by the C.N.T. Their achievements 
of workers’ control in industry is an inspiration. . . . There are still 
some Britishers and Americans who regard the Anarchists of Spain as 
impossible, undisciplined uncontrollables. This is poles away from the 
truth. The Anarchists of Spain, through the C.N.T., are doing one of 
the biggest constructive jobs ever done by the working class. At the 
front they are fighting Fascism. Behind the front they are actually 
constructing the new workers’ society. They see that the war against 
Fascism and the carrying through of the social revolution are insepara¬ 
ble. Those who have seen them and understood what they are doing must 
honor them and be grateful to them. . . . That is surely the biggest 
thing which has hitherto been done by the workers in any part of 
the world. 

105. Cited by Richards, op . cit., pp. 76-81, where long descriptive 
quotations are given. 

106. See Hugh Thomas, “Anarchist Agrarian Collectives in the Span¬ 
ish Civil War” (note 59). He cites figures showing that agricultural pro¬ 
duction went up in Aragon and Castile, where collectivization was 
extensive, and down in Catalonia and the Levant, where peasant pro¬ 
prietors were the dominant element. 

Thomas’ is, to my knowledge, the only attempt by a professional 
historian to assess the data on agricultural collectivization in Spain in 
a systematic way. He concludes that the collectives were probably “a con¬ 
