the blind and maimed, no professors haggard from long terms 
in jail ... we have never been forced ... to recognize our 
deeds, to bow, to apologize, to promise a life of peace. We 
have, in other words, never been caught. 55 Thus protest is muted 
and diffuse, as “Uncle Sam, the white-gloved financier of coun¬ 
terrevolution has removed his gloves, taken gun in hand, and 
moved into the jungle, 55 and has slowly composed “an enormous 
pattern of devastation which, if seen in its entirety, would have 
to be described as one of the most evil acts committed by any 
nation in modern times. 55 

There are, I think, certain gaps in Zinn’s analysis of the 
factors that prevent withdrawal of what can only be described as 
our army of occupation. Consider the matter of prestige. Zinn 
disposes effectively of the claim that our prestige as a nation 
would be diminished by withdrawal, noting that this would 
satisfy a range of opinion that extends from Adenauer to the 
Japanese left. But there is also the matter of internal prestige— 
the factor to which Eric Hobsbawm referred when he pointed 
out that American policy making often seems less concerned 
with red areas on the map than with red faces in the Penta¬ 
gon. 

Furthermore, it may be that in some respects Zinn under¬ 
estimates the subtlety of those whose arguments he counters. 
For example, he remarks that “we see every rebellion as the 
result of some plot concocted in Moscow or Peking, 55 and that 
the Russians make the same mistake, attributing revolts “in 
Hungary or Poznan ... to bourgeois influence or to American 
scheming. 55 Although one can, to be sure, become a prisoner of 
one’s own propaganda, it is nevertheless difficult to believe that 
the Russian leaders so misunderstood the events of 1956; more 


257 


- AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

likely, they were unwilling to tolerate an erosion of their power 
in a sensitive buffer area and found in “bourgeois influence” and 
“American scheming” a useful propaganda cover. Similarly, it 
strains credulity to suppose that our present Secretary of State 
was simply deluded when he described “the Peiping regime,” in 
1951, as “a colonial Russian Government—a Slavic Manchukuo 
on a larger scale.” Ample evidence was available to him to show 
the absurdity of this evaluation, for example, in the State De¬ 
partment White Paper on China published not long before. 
More likely, as in the case of the Hungarian revolution, it was 
necessary to find a way to justify a variety of long-range poli¬ 
