summarizes a discussion of intervention with these remarks: 
“We have intervened in the political, military and economic 
affairs of other countries to the tune of far in excess of $100 
billion, and we are at present involved in a costly and risky war 
in order to build a nation in South Vietnam. Only the enemies 
of the United States will question the generosity of these efforts, 
which have no parallel in history.” 17 Whatever one may think 
about the $100 billion, it is difficult to see why anyone should 
take seriously the professed “generosity” of our effort to build a 
nation in South Vietnam, any more than the similar professions 
of benevolence by our many forerunners in such enterprises. 
Generosity has never been a commodity in short supply among 
powers bent on extending their hegemony. 


32 



Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


Still another strand in the ideology of the new emerging elite 
is the concern for order, for maintaining the status quo, which is 
now seen to be quite favorable and essentially just. An excellent 
example is the statement by fourteen leading political scientists 
and historians on United States Asian policy, recently dis¬ 
tributed by the Freedom House Public Affairs Institute. 18 
These scholars designate themselves as “the moderate segment 
of the academic community.” The designation is accurate; they 
stand midway between the two varieties of extremism, one 
which demands that we destroy everyone who stands in our 
path, the other, that we adopt the principles of international 
behavior we require of every other world power. The purpose 
of their statement is to “challenge those among us who, over¬ 
whelmed by guilt complexes, find comfort in asserting or imply¬ 
ing that we are always wrong, our critics always right, and that 
only doom lies ahead.” They find our record in Asia to be “re¬ 
markably good,” and applaud our demonstrated ability to 
rectify mistakes, our “capacity for pragmatism and self-exami¬ 
nation,” and our “healthy avoidance of narrow nationalism,” 
capacities which distinguish us “among the major societies of 
this era.” 

The moderate scholars warn that “to avoid a major war in the 
Asia-Pacific region, it is essential that the United States con¬ 
tinue to deter, restrain, and counterbalance Chinese power.” 
True, “China has exercised great prudence in avoiding a direct 
confrontation with the United States or the Soviet Union” since 
the Korean War, and it is likely that China will “continue to 
