It need hardly be pointed out that it was the American ex¬ 
peditionary force from whom the Filipinos needed “defense.” 
Nor will I discuss the kind of society that we bequeathed 
them, 64 except to remark that for reasons that are perhaps 
obvious, the Huk guerrillas once again appear to be in control of 
large areas of central Luzon, setting the stage for what may be a 
bloody re-enactment of the tragedy of Vietnam. 

We can also learn a good deal from the reactions of American 


254 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


observers to the tensions that have developed between the 
United States and the Philippines in the postwar period. Con¬ 
sider, for example, the remarks of David Sternberg, 65 who asks 
“what has happened to the Philippine reservoir of good will and 
friendship toward Americans” since formal independence was 
granted to our Philippine colony? To this long-term resident of 
the Philippines and former AID adviser, it appears that there 
were “few complex problems” under the American occupation, 
“once the scars of war had healed and America’s good inten¬ 
tions had gained credence” and “the mass of Filipinos were able 
to relate the realization of their personal hopes and aspirations 
to a benign American presence.” But now, “the commercial 
American, though still benign employer, is also a potential 
competitor.” The old, mutually satisfactory “mentor-student” 
relation, suffused by the warmth of the benign employer to his 
wards, is difficult to reconstruct under the conditions of formal 
independence. Of course, there is hope, for example, in the 
“cultural predisposition toward private enterprise” and the ex¬ 
istence of “a small but highly competent body of planners and 
managers at the top level of the private economic sector.” The 
hope is not dimmed by the fact that seventy years after the 
“benign American presence” was established by force, three 
quarters of the population live under conditions unchanged 
since the Spanish occupation, under the continuing rule of a 
political and economic elite who were “coopted into the colonial 
regime” and have “an affectionate respect for the American way 
of life,” 66 a respect not unrelated, perhaps, to the great privi¬ 
leges that they enjoy as a consequence of the American con¬ 
quest. 67 

It is remarkable to see how easily perceptive and informed 
commentators succeed in deluding themselves as to the charac¬ 
ter of American actions and policies. For example, Roger Hils- 
