leadership had overruled the military leaders and in effect 
capitulated to the West at the London Naval Conference, “was 
a great stimulus to the fascist movement” (p. 81). In 1932 a 
series of assassinations of important political figures (including 
Prime Minister Inukai) contributed further to the decline of 
civilian power and the strengthening of the hand of the mili¬ 
tary. 

The international reaction to these events was ambiguous. 
The League of Nations sent a commission of inquiry, the 
Lytton Commission, to investigate the Manchurian situation. Its 
report rejected the Japanese position that Manchukuo should 
be established as an independent state, and insisted on a loose 
form of Chinese sovereignty, at which point Japan withdrew 
from the League of Nations. The United States also found itself 


177 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


somewhat isolated diplomatically, in that the harsh anti-Japa¬ 
nese position taken by Secretary of State Stimson received little 
support from the other Western powers. 

In a careful review of the point of view of the Lytton Com¬ 
mission, the Inukai government, and the central army authori¬ 
ties, Sadako Ogata demonstrates a considerable area of agree¬ 
ment : 

. . . the central army authorities . . . insisted upon the creation of 
a new local regime with authority to negotiate settlement of 
Manchurian problems, but under the formal sovereignty of the 
Chinese National Government, a traditional arrangement. This 
was the arrangement that the world at large was willing to accept. 
The Lytton Commission proposed the constitution of a special 
regime for the administration of Manchuria possessed of a large 
measure of autonomy but under Chinese jurisdiction. Finally, 
when the State of Manchukuo declared its independence, the 
Government of Japan withheld formal recognition and thereby 
attempted to avoid a head-on collision with the powers, which by 
then had lined up behind the doctrine of non-recognition of 
changes caused by Japanese military action in Manchuria. The 
complete political reconstruction of Manchuria was achieved, 
then, at the hands of the Kwantung Army in defiance of the 
opposition of government and central military leaders. 28 

The Lytton Commission report took cognizance of some of the 
complexities in the situation. The report drew the following 
conclusion: 

This is not a case in which one country has declared war on 
another country without previously exhausting the opportunities 
for conciliation provided in the Covenant of the League of Na¬ 
tions. Neither is it a simple case of the violation of the frontier of 
one country by the armed forces of a neighboring country, be¬ 
cause in Manchuria there are many features without an exact 
parallel in other parts of the world. 


178 




The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


The report went on to point out that the dispute arose in a 
territory in which both China and Japan “claim to have rights 
and interests, only some of which are clearly defined by inter¬ 
national law; a territory which, although legally an integral part 
of China, had a sufficiently autonomous character to carry out 
direct negotiations with Japan on the matters which lay at the 
roots of this conflict .” 29 

It is an open question whether a more conciliatory American 
diplomacy that took into account some of the real problems 
faced by Japan might have helped the civilian government 
(backed by the central army authorities) to prevail over the 
independent initiative of the Kwantung Army, which ultimately 
succeeded in bringing the Japanese government to recognize 
the fait accompli of a Manchukuo that was more a puppet of 
the Kwantung Army than of Japan proper. 

In any event, the success of the Kwantung Army in enforcing 
its conception of the status of Manchuria set Japan and the 
United States on a collision course. Japan turned to an “inde¬ 
pendent diplomacy” and reliance on force to achieve its objec¬ 
tives. The Japanese position of the mid-thirties is described as 
follows by Royama. Japan’s aim is 

not to conquer China, or to take any territory from her, but 
instead to create jointly with China and Manchukuo a new order 
comprising the three independent states. In accordance with this 
programme, East Asia is to become a vast self-sustaining region 
where Japan will acquire economic security and immunity from 
such trade boycotts as she has been experiencing at the hands of 
