was the real target of the Vietminh,” and expressed his hope that 
they “fully appreciate the threat.” Meanwhile, United States 
assistance had built a powerful army and supplied the police 
with tanks, artillery, armored cars, an air force, naval patrol 
vessels, and a training school for paratroopers. The police 
achieved one of the highest ratios of policemen to citizens in the 


64 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


world—about 1 to 400. The police chief meanwhile relied on 
“his monopoly of the opium trade and his extensive commercial 
enterprises for the income he needed to support his personal 
political machine,” while the army chief “received an enormous 
income from the national lottery.” 

It was later discovered that the chief of police had committed 
indescribable atrocities; “the extent of the torture and murder 
committed by the former police chief will probably never be 
known.” What is known is what came to light after Sarit, the 
army chief, took power in a new coup in 1957. Sarit “stressed 
the need to maintain a stable government and intensify the 
suppression of local Communists to ‘ensure continued Ameri¬ 
can trust, confidence and aid/ ” The Americans were naturally 
gratified, and the official reaction was very favorable. When 
Sarit died in 1963 it was discovered that his personal fortune 
reached perhaps $137 million. Both Darling and Roger Hilsman 
refer to him as a “benevolent” dictator, perhaps because he 
“realized that Communism could not be stopped solely by mass 
arrests, firing squads, or threats of brutal punishment, and 
launched a development project in the Northeast regions,” 
along with various other mild reforms—without, however, ceas¬ 
ing the former practices, which he felt might “impress the 
Americans again with the need for more military and economic 
aid to prevent ‘Communist’ subversion.” He also imposed rigid- 
censorship, abolished trade organizations and labor unions and 
punished suspected “Communists” without mercy, and, as noted 
earlier, took various steps to attract foreign investment. 

By 1960, “twelve percent of American foreign aid to Thailand 
since the beginning of the cold war had been devoted to eco¬ 
nomic and social advancement.” The effect of the American aid 
was clear. “The vast material and diplomatic support provided to 
the military leaders by the United States helped to prevent the 


