AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


war. They have to face this decision alone, or almost alone. We 
should ask ourselves why this is so. 

Why, for example, does Senator Mansfield feel “ashamed for 
the image they have portrayed of this country, 1 ” and not feel 
ashamed for the image of this country portrayed by the institu¬ 
tion these young people were confronting, an institution di¬ 
rected by a sane and mild and eminently reasonable man who 
can testify calmly before Congress that the amount of ordnance 
expended in Vietnam has surpassed the total expended in Ger¬ 
many and Italy in World War II ? Why is it that Senator Mans¬ 
field can speak in ringing phrases about those who are not 
living up to our commitment to “a government of laws”—refer¬ 
ring to a small group of demonstrators, not to the ninety-odd 
responsible men on the Senate floor who are watching, with full 
knowledge, as the state they serve clearly, flagrantly violates the 
explicit provisions of the United Nations Charter, the supreme 
law 7 of the land? He kmrws quite w^ell that prior to our invasion 
of Vietnam there was no armed attack against any state. It was 
Senator Mansfield, after all, w T ho informed us that “when the 
sharp increase in the American military effort began in early 
1965, it w^as estimated that only about 400 North Vietnamese 
soldiers w r ere among the enemy forces in the South w T hich 
totaled 140,000 at that time”; and it is the Mansfield Report 
from w 7 hich we learn that at that time there were 34,000 Ameri¬ 
can soldiers already in South Vietnam, in violation of our 
“solemn commitment” at Geneva in 1954. 

The point should be pursued. After the first International 
Days of Protest in October 1965, Senator Mansfield criticized 
the “sense of utter irresponsibility” shown by the demonstrators. 
He had nothing to say then, nor has he since, about the “sense 
of utter irresponsibility” showm by Senator Mansfield and others 
w r ho stand by quietly and vote appropriations as the cities and 


370 


On Resistance 


villages of North Vietnam are demolished, as millions of refu¬ 
gees in the South are driven from their homes by American 
bombardment. He has nothing to say about the moral standards 
or the respect for law of those who have permitted this 
tragedy. 

I speak of Senator Mansfield precisely because he is not a 
breast-beating superpatriot who wants America to rule the 
world, but is rather an American intellectual in the best sense, a 
scholarly and reasonable man—the kind of man who is the 
terror of our age. Perhaps this is merely a personal reaction, but 
when I look at what is happening to our country, what I find 
most terrifying is not Curtis LeMay, with his cheerful sugges¬ 
tion that we bomb our “enemies” back into the Stone Age, but 
rather the calm disquisitions of the political scientists on just 
how much force will be necessary to achieve our ends, or just 
what form of government will be acceptable to us in Vietnam. 
What I find terrifying is the detachment and equanimity with 
which we view and discuss an unbearable tragedy. We all know 
that if Russia or China were guilty of what we have done in 
Vietnam, we would be exploding with moral indignation at 
these monstrous crimes. 

There was, I think, a serious miscalculation in the planning of 
the Washington demonstrations. It was expected that the march 
to the Pentagon would be followed by a number of speeches, 
and that those who were committed to civil disobedience would 
then separate themselves from the crowd and go to the Penta¬ 
gon, a few hundred yards away across an open field. I had 
decided not to take part in civil disobedience, and I do not 
know in detail what had been planned. As everyone must real¬ 
ize, it is very hard to distinguish rationalization from rationality 
in such matters. I felt, however, that the first large-scale acts of 
civil disobedience should be more specifically defined, more 


371 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


clearly in support of those who are refusing to serve in Vietnam, 
on whom the real burden of dissent must inevitably fall. While 
appreciating the point of view of those who wished to express 
their hatred of the war in a more explicit way, I was not con¬ 
vinced that civil disobedience at the Pentagon would be either 
meaningful or effective. 

In any event, what actually happened was rather different 
from what anyone had anticipated. A few thousand people 
gathered for the speeches, but the mass of marchers went 
straight on to the Pentagon, some because they were committed 
to direct action, many because they were simply swept along. 
From the speakers’ platform where I stood it was difficult to 
