

203 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


major issues . 91 The United States insisted on making the Axis 
alliance a major issue, though Japan persistently de-emphasized 
it. Schroeder argues that the American motive was in part “sell¬ 
ing the anticipated war with Japan to the American people/' 
who might not “agree that an attack on non-American soil—on 
Thailand, Malaya, Singapore, or the Netherlands East Indies— 
constituted an attack on the United States ." 92 It may be that 
the underlying motive was to justify the forthcoming American 
involvement in the European war. In any event, the American 
terms, by November, were such that Japan would have had to 
abandon totally its attempt to secure “special interests" of the 
sort possessed by the United States and Britain in the areas 
under their domination, as well as its alliance with the Axis 
powers, becoming a mere “subcontractor" in the emerging 
American world system. Japan chose war—as we now know, 
with no expectation of victory over the United States but in the 
hope “that the Americans, confronted by a German victory in 
Europe and weary of war in the Pacific, would agree to a 
negotiated peace in which Japan would be recognized as the 
dominant power in Eastern Asia ." 93 

On November 7, 1941, Japan offered to accept “the principle 
of nondiscrimination in commercial relations" in the Pacific, in¬ 
cluding China, if this principle “were adopted throughout the 
world." The qualification was, needless to say, quite unthinka¬ 
ble. Hulks final demand was that the principle be applied in the 
Japanese occupied areas and that Japan withdraw all forces 
from China and Indochina. The Western powers could not be 
expected to respond in kind in their dominions. A few days later 
came “the day that will live in infamy." 

This final exchange points clearly to what had been, for dec¬ 
ades, the central problem. Japan had insisted that in its plans 
for “coprosperity" and then a “new order," it was simply follow- 


204 


