
If the South Vietnamese forces of Prime Minister Ky are so 
inadequate in numbers, intelligence, and training that they cannot 
handle entirely the pacification program in the villages . . . , then 
instead of Americans trying to train, indoctrinate, and pacify an 
alien people, the time is long past due for us to withdraw to our 
coastal bases and eventually from Vietnam. 2 

This reaction echoes that of Senator Symington after a recent 
Asian trip: 

If the South Vietnamese do not achieve this pacification, there is 
no point in this country continuing to pour out lives and treasure 
in order to protect a government that can neither consolidate nor 
control what has been taken from them by their own citizens and 
the North Vietnamese. If the United States decides to become the 
major factor in this pacification program [as it has since be¬ 
come] as well as in the fighting of the war [as it became long 
ago], it can only become an extended war of the white man 
against the Asians, on the mainland of Asia. 3 

Symington’s remarks are no doubt accurate, and if past his¬ 
tory is any guide, they will soon be forgotten, as Americans 
become habituated to the new reality. It was, after all, not very 
long ago that a well-known Asian specialist, with close State 
Department connections, was able to draw the following con¬ 
clusion in a review of Southeast Asian affairs: 


223 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


It is unthinkable that the United States would move into the 
country directly, take over the conduct of the warfare against the 
Vietcong, and attempt to build and manage a government for 
Saigon and the countryside. Apart from other difficulties, this 
would offer convincing proof of the Communist charge of “im¬ 
perialism” daily leveled against our government. For the United 
States to carry the war to the north on any large scale would have 
the same result. 4 

Observe that the date of this evaluation was February 1965; 
as we recall, “convincing proof of the Communist charge of 
imperialism” was not long in coming. And today, there is very 
good reason to suppose that we will find ourselves in “an ex¬ 
tended war of the white man against the Asians, on the main¬ 
land of Asia.” 

Far from being naive, the analysis of the situation that leads 
to the call for withdrawal—not eventual but immediate—seems 
to me entirely realistic; and the dimensions of the Vietnamese 
tragedy are so awesome that whatever the prospects for success 
may be, the responsible citizen must spare no effort to create 
the political climate, the background of insight and understand¬ 
ing, in which this call will become a powerful one. The urgency 
of this matter can hardly be exaggerated. It seems unlikely that 
the Johnson administration will be willing to face the 1968 elec¬ 
tions with an unwinnable war on its hands. The prospects are 
therefore for sharp escalation, perhaps a forced confrontation 
with China. What is more, the rapid growth of Chinese nuclear 
weapon and missile capacity will surely suggest to Pentagon 
planners the need to act now, before the Chinese are in a posi¬ 
tion to hold an American army hostage on the fringes of Asia. 
With this prospect, attempts to predict what may happen 
next are as irrational as our Vietnamese policy itself. 

Zinn gives a concise but persuasive analysis of the political 
and moral character of the war, the international reaction, the 


224 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


justifications that are offered for persisting in the semiprinci- 
pled, semilunatic course of action in which we are now so 
heavily engaged. His general thesis seems to me entirely cor¬ 
rect. The issues are so grave that I would like to go well beyond 
the bounds of a review and indicate some of the directions in 
which his discussion might be extended and elaborated. 

What is the situation that American policy makers face in 
mid-1967? The American military takeover of “pacification” is a 
testimony to the failure, thus far, of the effort to impose a 
political solution by force on an unwilling population. Its true 
significance is tersely indicated by an unnamed American offi¬ 
cial in Saigon who comments: “We’ve been playing the be-nice- 
to-the-Asian game for ten years, and it’s been a flop. We can’t 
afford it any longer.” 5 The American chief of civil operations in 
the northernmost provinces attributes the failure of the “revolu¬ 
tionary development teams” to the “overwhelming corruption” 
of Vietnamese official life, to the failure to understand that 
“until there is a contented peasantry there is no room for the 
opulent society of the government of Vietnam.” 6 The same re¬ 
port in the Times goes on to give a dramatic example of the 
