394 



Supplement to “On Resistance” 


vironment,” tranquilizing darts, etc.—AP report, November 11, 
1967), ideas which give an interesting portent of what is to come 
and a useful insight into university-sponsored research at its best. 
My guess is that talk of disruptive acts is a fantasy. 

I have said nothing about ghetto rebellions. These may affect 
the war, in one or another way, but they are not acts under¬ 
taken with the end of bringing about American withdrawal from 
Vietnam and must, I think, be considered in a totally different 
context. 

Although the context today remains quite different, it is still 
very much to be hoped that resistance against the Vietnam war 
and the deeper imperialist forces of which it is a manifesta¬ 
tion can contribute to the struggle against domestic oppression. 
No doubt one of the pressures on the government to end the war 
is the fear that the troops will be needed to occupy American 
cities and to enforce the status quo at home. The kind of “lim¬ 
ited war” mentality that underlies the IDA study just men¬ 
tioned is revealed even more explicitly by Homer Bigart in the 
New York Times , March 22, 1968, in a long report headed: 
“Army Helps Police Get ‘Hip’ on Riots.” I quote a few para¬ 
graphs, to give the flavor: 

On a piney knoll some 60 city and state policeman and National 
Guard officers gathered yesterday to watch the testing of “non- 
lethal agents” that may be used this summer to disperse riotous 
mobs in the nation’s cities. . . . Robins sang, coffee and cookies 
were served and the post band played “The Stars and Stripes 
Forever” as the sixth class of the Civil Disobedience Orientation 
Course climbed out of an Army bus to begin a 20-hour course on 
the anatomy of a riot ... [at the] . . . Army’s riot control school, 
an institution hurriedly conceived a few months ago to teach the 
grim lessons derived from the Detroit and Newark riots. . . . 

The report goes on to describe the new, “more devastating” 
types of tear gas now available, and the ways in which grenades 


395 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


and helicopters can be used to control “the mobs.' 5 An accom¬ 
panying picture shows a “'simulated battle between militant 
civil rights demonstrators and the National Guardsmen. 5, The 
demonstrators hold a sign saying “We Shall Overcome 55 and the 
heavily armed soldiers, with gas masks and fixed bayonets, 
demonstrate how this slogan can be refuted. The description 
continues as follows: 

The clash is staged in a Hollywood type mockup of a community 
called Riotsville. . . . “Baby,” a firebrand militant .... harangues 
a crowd, charging policy brutality. The crowd waves signs de¬ 
nouncing war. One sign reads £ ‘We Shall Overcome.” Bricks and 
rocks ... are thrown at the “Mayor” when he tries to placate the 
mob. 

But here comes the National Guard. Using tear gas, bayonets, 
an armored personnel carrier, and classic antiriot tactics, the 
troops prevail. ‘“Baby” is seized and taken off in the armored car, 
a prisoner. 

Presumably the audience breathes a sigh of relief, sipping their 
coffee and munching on cookies to the strains of “The Stars and 
Stripes Forever 55 as the scene fades, secure in the knowledge 
that those who denounce war and poverty and racism shall not 
prevail—all of this certainly a reasonable forecast of what the 
future may hold. 

I do agree with Mr. X in his criticism of the tactic of escalat¬ 
ing confrontation that was proposed, at one time, by the loosely 
organized group called “The Resistance. 55 Confrontations will 
come quickly enough. The real task, for the present, is to organ¬ 
ize as large as possible a base of support for resistance—a pro¬ 
liferation of local resistance support groups linked together in a 
national network, with participation of white and black resis¬ 
ters, with adult middle-class support on and off campus, sub¬ 
stantial financial assistance, and personal involvement by peo¬ 
ple who feel that resistance can be made politically effective. 


396 


Supplement to “On Resistance 1 


who feel that they have a moral responsibility to give concrete 
