versary of collectivization, whom the CNT ministers find block¬ 
ing all of their proposals. He is the one who solidly reorganized 
the carabineros and presided over the transfer of the gold re¬ 
serves of the Republic to the USSR. He enjoyed the confidence 
of the moderates . . . [and] was on excellent terms with the 
Communists.” 

The first major act of the Negrin government was the sup¬ 
pression of the POUM and the consolidation of central control 
over Catalonia. The government next turned to Aragon, which 
had been under largely anarchist control since the first days of 
the revolution, and where agricultural collectivization was quite 
extensive and Communist elements very weak. The municipal 
councils of Aragon were coordinated by the Council of 
Aragon, headed by Joaquin Ascaso, a well-known CNT mili¬ 
tant, one of whose brothers had been killed during the May 
Days. Under the Caballero government, the anarchists had 
agreed to give representation to other antifascist parties, includ¬ 
ing the Communists, but the majority remained anarchist. In 
August the Negrin government announced the dissolution of 
the Council of Aragon and dispatched a division of the Spanish 
army, commanded by the Communist officer Enrique Lister, to 
enforce the dissolution of the local committees, dismantle the 
collectives, and establish central government control. Ascaso 
was arrested on the charge of having been responsible for the 
robbery of jewelry—namely, the jewelry “robbed” by the 
Council for its own use in the fall of 1936. The local anarchist 
press was suppressed in favor of a Communist journal, and in 


103 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


general local anarchist centers were forcefully occupied and 
closed. The last anarchist stronghold was captured, with tanks 
and artillery, on September 21. Because of government-imposed 
censorship, there is very little of a direct record of these events, 
and the major histories pass over them quickly. 100 According to 
Morrow, “the official CNT press . . . compared the assault on 
Aragon with the subjection of Asturias by Lopez Ochoa in Oc¬ 
tober 1934”—the latter, one of the bloodiest acts of repression 
in modern Spanish history. Although this is an exaggeration, it 
is a fact that the popular organs of administration were wiped 
out by Lister’s legions, and the revolution was now over, so far 
as Aragon was concerned. 
