properly irate about the “warfare in the shadows” of the Viet- 
cong, their “ambush and assassination and torture, leaving be¬ 
hind a trail of burned villages, shattered families and weeping 
women” (the “trail of burned villages” is not further identified, 
but perhaps the cast of characters has become confused at this 
point); and he is not lacking in contempt for those who mob 
the Secretary of Defense or burn draft cards. One wonders 
whether he would have been equally offended by a comparable 
“outpouring of emotion” in Italy in 1935, or Russia in 1956. But 
as far as American actions are concerned, “it is not only idle but 
unfair to seek out guilty men.” Johnson and Humphrey are 
mere “sentimental imperialists,” fundamentally decent men 
with an “Asian vision” that is “not dishonorable,” interested in 
“the salvation of Asia.” 

Not unexpectedly, the Kennedy administration escapes any 
censure, except for its failure to keep up with the press reports 
of what was actually taking place. True, Kennedy introduced 
an army of over 15,000 men, nearly three times the size of the 
Condor Legion sent by Hitler to “fight Communism” in an ear¬ 
lier civil war. But this was simply the “politics of inadvertence.” 
As to the “crisis of credibility,” the implication is that this too is 
a post-Kennedy phenomenon—no one would guess from read¬ 
ing this book that a White Paper of December 1961 was entitled 
“A Threat to the Peace: North Vietnam’s Effort to Con¬ 
quer South Vietnam.” Nor would the reader of The Bitter Her¬ 
itage be likely to guess that not long before, its author was 


300 



The Bitter Heritage 


referring to 1962 as “not a bad year,” with “aggression checked 
in Vietnam,” or reiterating, with apparent approval, a charac¬ 
terization of North Vietnam as “the source of aggression” (A 
Thousand Days). 

Still, in basic respects, Schlesinger’s approach to the conduct 
of international affairs has a certain internal consistency. He 
was opposed to the abortive Cuba invasion in 1961, because of 
his feeling that the planned deception was not likely to succeed, 
not out of any principled objection to such an action. Similarly, 
today, he refers with skepticism to Joseph Alsop’s prediction 
that before too long “the Vietnamese war will look successful” 
from the American point of view, but adds that “we all pray 
that Mr. Alsop will be right.” The liberal view, Schlesinger 
