“to strengthen the police and security forces and other institu¬ 
tions contributing to a modern police state” in South Viet¬ 
nam. 50 One is no longer even surprised to read the recommen¬ 
dation, from a knowledgeable and quite liberal correspondent, 
that “The United States ought to send [to Vietnam] the best 
people it has, at this sensitive business of political reorienta¬ 
tion,” so that the field will not be left to the NLF. 61 As he 
points out, our Vietnamese “are playing a power game, both 
locally and in Saigon, for their own special privileges and inter¬ 
est,” and they have “little but contempt for the villagers.” 
Therefore, we must find a way to win allegiance for them 
among the peasantry. Imagine how Saville Davis would react 
on reading such a recommendation in Pravda . Both he and his 
readers take for granted, however, that the United States has 
the right to carry out “political reorientation” (not to speak of 
the right to use military force) anywhere in the world. 

The Vietnamese revolutionaries may or may not succeed in 
freeing their country from American domination, but they have 
already succeeded in shattering American complacency with 
regard to our international role. American power is so great that 
no outside force can call us to account; hence the overwhelming 
urgency of the effort to overcome the effects of a generation of 
indoctrination and a long history of self-adulation. We will 
simply compound the tragedy of Vietnam if we do not exploit 
this opportunity to break loose from the stranglehold of ideol- 


244 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


ogy and the tradition of conformism that makes a mockery of 
the values we pretend to hold. 

The first step towards political sanity must be intensive self- 
examination, exposure not only of what we do and what we 
represent in the world today, but also of the attitudes that color 
and distort our perception of our international behavior. A re¬ 
markable expression of these attitudes appears in a deservedly 
famous article by Neil Sheehan, written on his return from 
three years as a war correspondent in Vietnam. 52 From his 
direct observations, he concludes that “for its own strategic and 
political ends, the United States is . . . protecting a non-Com- 
munist Vietnamese social structure that cannot defend itself 
and that perhaps does not deserve to be defended.” “Idealism 
and dedication are largely the prerogative of the enemy”; “in 
Vietnam, only the Communists represent revolution and social 
change” and “despite their brutality and deceit, remain the only 
Vietnamese capable of rallying millions of their countrymen to 
sacrifice and hardship in the name of the nation and the only 
group not dependent on foreign bayonets for survival.” On our 
side are the military, and the “mandarins drawn from the mer¬ 
chant and landowning families” who had collaborated with the 
French just as they collaborate with us. 53 He points out that 
the existing social system defends privilege and that “many 
young Vietnamese of peasant origin join the Vietcong because 
the Communists . . . offer them their best hope of avoiding a life 
on the rung of the ladder where they began—at the bottom.” 
He describes the new construction in Saigon, virtually all “lux¬ 
ury apartments, hotels and office buildings financed by Chinese 
businessmen or affluent Vietnamese with relatives or connec¬ 
tions within the regime . . . destined to be rented to Americans,” 
while “Saigon’s workers live, as they always have, in fetid slums 


245 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


on the city’s outskirts.” But these are the lucky ones—lucky, 
that is, in comparison with the more than a million refugees, 
most of whom have left their homes “because they could no 
longer bear American and South Vietnamese bombs and shells” 
or the hundreds of thousands killed and wounded, victims 
largely of “the extraordinary firepower of American weaponry,” 
often turned against helpless villagers by cynical South Viet¬ 
namese officials. 54 He describes the American strategy as one of 
“creating a killing machine . . . and then turning this machine 
on the enemy in the hope that over the years enough killing will 
be done to force the enemy’s collapse through exhaustion and 
despair” 55 —the enemy being, for the most part, the rural popu¬ 
lation of South Vietnam. 

Sheehan concludes this account in the following way: “De¬ 
spite these misgivings, I do not see how we can do anything 
but continue to prosecute the war,” although he cannot fail to 
ask himself “whether the United States or any nation has the 
right to inflict this suffering and degradation on another people 
for its own ends.” The reason: any other course “might under¬ 
mine our entire position in Southeast Asia.” 

Many people have commented on the disparity between the 
