The warning, issued in the official Gibraltar Gazette, was 
signed by the British Colonial Secretary here. 

The warning was issued after reports of possible Communist 
troubles here had reached official ears and after strong complaints 
that Spanish Rebels were in Gibraltar. It was said Rebels were 
making headquarters here and entering La Linea to fight. [Italics 
mine] 

I have quoted this dispatch in full because it conveys rather 
accurately the character of British “neutrality” in the early 
stages of the war and thenceforth. In May 1938, the British 
ambassador to Spain, Sir Henry Chilton, “expressed the convic¬ 
tion that a Franco victory was necessary for peace in Spain; 
that there was not the slightest chance that Italy and/or Ger¬ 
many would dominate Spain; and that even if it were possible 
for the Spanish Government to win (which he did not believe) 
he was convinced that a victory for Franco would be better for 
Great Britain.” 129 Churchill, who was at first violently opposed 
to the Republic, modified his position somewhat after the crush¬ 
ing of the revolution in the summer of 1937. What particularly 
pleased him was the forceful repression of the anarchists and 
the militarization of the Republic (necessary when “the entire 
structure of civilization and social life is destroyed,” as it had 
been by the revolution, now happily subdued). 130 However, 
his good feelings towards the Republic remained qualified. In 
an interview of August 14, 1938, he expressed himself as follows: 
“Franco has all the right on his side because he loves his coun¬ 
try. Also Franco is defending Europe against the Communist 


118 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


danger—if you wish to put it in those terms. But I, I am En¬ 
glish, and I prefer the triumph of the wrong cause. I prefer that 
the other side wins, because Franco could be an upset or a 
threat to British interests, and the others no.” 131 

The Germans were quite aware of British sentiments, natu¬ 
rally, and therefore were much concerned that the supervisory 
committee for the nonintervention agreement be located in 
London rather than Paris. The German Foreign Ministry official 
responsible for this matter expressed his view on August 29, 
1936, as follows: “Naturally, we have to count on complaints of 
all kinds being brought up in London regarding failure to ob¬ 
serve the obligation not to intervene, but we cannot avoid such 
complaints in any case. It can, in fact, only be agreeable to us if 
the center of gravity, which after all has thus far been in Paris 
because of the French initiative, is transferred to London.” 132 
They were not disappointed. In November, Foreign Secretary 
Anthony Eden stated in the House of Commons: “So far as 
breaches [of the nonintervention agreement] are concerned, I 
wish to state categorically that I think there are other Govern¬ 
ments more to blame than those of Germany and Italy.” 133 
There was no factual basis for this statement, but it did reflect 
British attitudes. It is interesting that according to German 
sources, England was at that time supplying Franco with 
munitions through Gibraltar and, at the same time, providing 
information to Germany about Russian arms deliveries to the 
Republic. 134 

The British left was for the most part in support of the lib- 
eral-Communist coalition, regarding Caballero as an “infantile 
leftist” and the anarchists as generally unspeakable. 

The British policy of mild support for Franco was to be suc¬ 
cessful in preserving British interests in Spain, as the Germans 
soon discovered. A German Foreign Ministry note of October 


119 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


1937 to the embassy in Nationalist Spain included the following 
observation: “That England cannot permanently be kept from 
the Spanish market as in the past is a fact w T ith which we have 
to reckon. England’s old relations with the Spanish mines and 
the Generalissimo’s desire, based on political and economic con¬ 
siderations, to come to an understanding with England place 
certain limits on our chances of reserving Spanish raw materials 
to ourselves permanently.” 135 

One can only speculate as to what might have been the 
effects of British support for the Republic. A discussion of this 
matter would take us far afield, into a consideration of British 
diplomacy during the late 1930s. It is perhaps worth mention, 
now that the “Munich analogy” is being bandied about in 
utter disregard for the historical facts by Secretary Rusk and a 
number of his academic supporters, that “containment of 
Communism” was not a policy invented by George Kennan in 
1947. Specifically, it was a dominant theme in the diplomacy of 
the 1930s. In 1934, Lloyd George stated that “in a very short 
time, perhaps in a year, perhaps in two, the conservative ele¬ 
