Vietnamese rangers move through their hamlet. Children had been 
rescued from a bunker under their house, burnt down when U.S. 
helicopters fired on Vietcong. The scene is the Mekong Delta, south¬ 
west of Saigon. 

I cannot describe the pathos of this scene, or the expression on 
the face of the wounded child. How many hundreds of such 
pictures must we see before we begin to care and to act? 

I suppose this is the first time in history that a nation has so 
openly and publicly exhibited its own war crimes. Perhaps this 
shows how well our free institutions function. Or does it simply 
show how immune we have become to suffering? Probably the 
latter. So at least it would seem, when we observe how opposi¬ 
tion to the war has grown in recent months. There is no doubt 
that the primary cause for this opposition is that the cost of the 
war to us is too great, unacceptable. It is deplorable, but none¬ 
theless true, that what has changed American public opinion 
and the domestic political picture is not the efforts of the “peace 
movement”—still less the declarations of any political spokes¬ 
men—but rather the Vietnamese resistance, which simply will 
not yield to American force. What is more, the “responsible” 
attitude is that opposition to the war on grounds of cost is not, 
as I have said, deplorable, but rather admirable, in keeping 
with the genius of American politics. American politics is a 
politics of accommodation that successfully excludes moral 
considerations. Therefore it is quite proper—a further demon¬ 
stration of our superior acuity—that only pragmatic considera¬ 
tions of cost and utility guide our actions. When Martin Luther 


10 


Introduction 


King was assassinated, Kenneth Clark said that “you have to 
weep for this country.” Are we to weep, or to laugh, when we 
read in the editorial columns of our great newspapers, and in 
much of the left-liberal press, that the health of our democratic 
system has been confirmed by Johnson's speech of March 31? 
With the collapse of his Vietnam policies, a serious international 
economic crisis, and domestic turmoil threatening to make the 
country impossible to govern, the President made a “noble” and 
“magnanimous” gesture—“the ultimate sacrifice for peace,” in 
the words of one senator: he announced that he would not seek 
renomination. This proves the viability of American democracy. 
By these standards a still more viable democracy was that of 
fascist Japan in the late 1930s, where more than a dozen cabi¬ 
nets fell under not dissimilar circumstances. The health of our 
system would have been demonstrated by a change of policy 
caused by a recognition that what we have done in Vietnam is 
wrong, a criminal act, that an American “victory” would have 
been a tragedy. Nothing could be more remote from the Ameri¬ 
can political consciousness. So long as this remains true, we are 
fated to relive this horror. 

The primary reason for opposition to the war is its cost to us. 
A second cause is the feeling that the cost to its victims is too 
great. At first glance, this reaction seems to be at a higher moral 
level than the first, but this is questionable. The principle that 
we should retract our claws when the victim bleeds too much is 
hardly an elevated one. What about opposition to the war on 
the grounds that we have no right to stabilize or restructure 
Vietnamese society, or to carry out the experiments with “mate¬ 
rial and human resources control” that delight the “pacification 
theorist”? Such opposition is slight, and in the political arena 
virtually nonexistent. The pragmatic and responsible student of 


11 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


contemporary affairs does not descend to such emotionalism. 

In March 1968, the Boston Globe ran a series of letters from a 
member of the International Voluntary Services, a teacher in a 
Montagnard village, obviously a person of great courage and 
dedication. For the most part, these were nice, chatty letters 
about life in Vietnam and the good things we’re doing for those 
poor people over there. Here are some selections from one let¬ 
ter: 

Funny thing about Vietnam, we’re creating these secure islands, 
people are relocated, shuffled into “pacified” areas, but most of 
the country is a no man’s land which we’re rapidly turning into a 
desert by bombing, defoliation, etc. ... If the Americans get their 
way, it’ll be a country of beaches, plus a few islands of secure 
areas . . . and the rest’ll be wasteland. Funny thing to do to a 
country whose economy and politics you’re paying to enhance. 
But they say the only way to beat the guerrilla forces is to 
eliminate their source of life (the land and the people), ruin the 
land and concentrate the people into areas you can protect . 4 

I think that such a letter tells us a good deal about the mood 
of the country today. A member of the IVS learns that what we 
