disguising themselves as proletarians for the time being . . . 

. . . waiting for that happy day when Communist power would rein¬ 
troduce the old state of society and destroy popular involvement in the 
war. 

In December 1936, however, the situation was still as described in 
the following remarks (p. 6): 

Yet so far as one can judge the people were contented and hopeful. 
There was no unemployment, and the price of living was still ex¬ 
tremely low; you saw very few conspicuously destitute people, and 
no beggars except the gipsies. Above all, there was a belief in the 
revolution and the future, a feeling of having suddenly emerged into 
an era of equality and freedom. Human beings were trying to behave 
as human beings and not as cogs in the capitalist machine. In the 
barbers’ shops were Anarchist notices (the barbers were mostly An¬ 
archists) solemnly explaining that barbers were no longer slaves. In 
the streets were coloured posters appealing to prostitutes to stop being 
prostitutes. To anyone from the hard-boiled, sneering civilization of the 
English-speaking races there was something rather pathetic in the 
literalness with which these idealistic Spaniards took the hackneyed 
phrases of revolution. At that time revolutionary ballads of the 
naiVest kind, all about proletarian brotherhood and the wickedness of 
Mussolini, were being sold on the streets for a few centimes each. I 
have often seen an illiterate militiaman buy one of these ballads, 
laboriously spell out the words, and then, when he had got the hang 
of it, begin singing it to an appropriate tune. 

Recall the dates. Orwell arrived in Barcelona in late December 1936. 
Comorera’s decree abolishing the workers’ supply committees and the 
bread committees was on January 7. Borkenau returned to Barcelona 
in mid-January; Orwell, in April. 

91. See Bolloten, op . cit., p. 74, citing the anarchist spokesman Juan 
Peiro, in September 1936. Like other anarchists and left-wing Social- 
lists, Peiro sharply condemns the use of force to introduce collectiviza¬ 
tion, taking the position that was expressed by most anarchists, as well 
as by left-wing socialists such as Ricardo Zabalza, general secretary of 
the Federation of Land Workers, who stated, on January 8, 1937: “I 
prefer a small, enthusiastic collective, formed by a group of active and 
honest workers, to a large collective set up by force and composed of 


146 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


