

AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


that the government deprived them of raw materials and was 
favoring the bourgeoisie” (p. 365). 

In fact, “the revolutionary tide began to ebb in Catalonia” 
under a middle-class attack led by the Communist party, not 
because of a recognition of the “complexity of modern society.” 
And it was, moreover, quite true that the Communist-domi¬ 
nated central government attempted, with much success, to 
hamper collectivized industry and agriculture and to disrupt the 
collectivization of commerce. I have already referred to the 
early stages of counterrevolution. Further investigation of the 
sources to which Jackson refers and others shows that the an¬ 
archist charges were not baseless, as Jackson implies. Bolloten 
cites a good deal of evidence in support of his conclusion that 

In the countryside the Communists undertook a spirited defence 
of the small and medium proprietor and tenant farmer against the 
collectivizing drive of the rural wage-workers, against the policy 
of the labour unions prohibiting the farmer from holding more 
land than he could cultivate with his own hands, and against the 
practices of revolutionary committees, which requisitioned har¬ 
vests, interfered with private trade, and collected rents from ten¬ 
ant farmers . 78 

The policy of the government was clearly enunciated by the 
Communist Minister of Agriculture: “We say that the property 
of the small farmer is sacred and that those who attack or 
attempt to attack this property must be regarded as enemies of 
the regime .” 79 Gerald Brenan, no sympathizer with collectiviza¬ 
tion, explains the failure of collectivization as follows (p. 
321): 

The Central Government, and especially the Communist and 
Socialist members of it, desired to bring [the collectives] under 
the direct control of the State: they therefore failed to provide 
them with the credit required for buying raw materials: as soon 
as the supply of raw cotton was exhausted the mills stopped 


88 



Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


working. . . . even [the munitions industry in Catalonia] were 
harassed by the new bureaucratic organs of the Ministry of Sup¬ 
ply . 80 

He quotes the bourgeois President of Catalonia, Companys, as 
saying that “workers in the arms factories in Barcelona had 
been working 56 hours and more each week and that no cases 
of sabotage or indiscipline had taken place/’ until the workers 
were demoralized by the bureaucratization—later, militariza¬ 
tion—imposed by the central government and the Communist 
party. 81 His own conclusion is that “the Valencia Government 
was now using the P.S.U.C. against the C.N.T.—but not . . . 
because the Catalan workers were giving trouble, but because 
the Communists wished to weaken them before destroying 
them.” 

The cited correspondence from Companys to Prieto, accord¬ 
ing to Vernon Richards (p. 47), presents evidence showing the 
success of Catalonian war industry under collectivization and 
demonstrating how “much more could have been achieved had 
the means for expanding the industry not been denied them by 
the Central Government.” Richards also cites testimony by a 
spokesman for the subsecretariat of munitions and armament of 
the Valencia government admitting that “the war industry of 
Catalonia had produced ten times more than the rest of Spanish 
industry put together and [agreeing] . . . that this output could 
have been quadrupled as from beginning of September* if 
Catalonia had had access to the necessary means for purchasing 
raw materials that were unobtainable in Spanish territory.” It is 
important to recall that the central government had enormous 
gold reserves (soon to be transmitted to the Soviet Union), so 
that raw materials for Catalan industry could probably have 

* The quoted testimony is from September 1, 1937; presumably, the reference 
is to September 1936. 


89 


+ - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

been purchased, despite the hostility of the Western democ¬ 
racies to the Republic during the revolutionary period (see 
below). Furthermore, raw materials had repeatedly been re¬ 
quested. On September 24, 1936, Juan Fabregas, the CNT 
delegate to the Economic Council of Catalonia who was in part 
responsible for the collectivization decree cited earlier, reported 
that the financial difficulties of Catalonia were created by the 
