justified in themselves when regarded in a narrow sense may be 
very wrong when considered in the light of their probable conse¬ 
quences. And a failure to approach those who can be reached, a 
failure to act with strength and determination when one can do 
so in a constructive way, is no less thoughtless and indefensible. 
These are very general remarks, and not very helpful, perhaps, 
when we face the concrete question of w T hat we can do right now. 
Still. I think that such guidelines as these must form the frame¬ 
work for these decisions. 

One final remark. The Vietnam war is the most obscene ex¬ 
ample of a frightening phenomenon of contemporary history— 
the attempt by our country to impose its particular concept of 
order and stability throughout much of the world. By any ob¬ 
jective standard, the United States has become the most aggres- 


399 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


sive power in the world, the greatest threat to peace, to national 
self-determination, and to international cooperation. At the 
same time, we enjoy a high degree of internal freedom. We can 
speak and write and organize. Resisters may be punished se¬ 
verely, but they will not be sent to slave-labor camps or gas 
chambers. Given these facts, resistance is feasible even for those 
who are not heroes by nature, and it is an obligation, I believe, 
for those who fear the consequences and detest the reality of 
the attempt to impose American hegemony. Resistance cannot 
now significantly deplete the manpower pool that makes possi¬ 
ble the use of American power for global repression, nor can it, 
at the moment, significantly impede the research, production, 
and supply on which this exercise of power rests. But it can 
contribute significantly towards raising the domestic costs of 
this attempt and eliminating the apathy and passivity that may 
permit it to succeed. It therefore has a potential significance 
that extends far beyond Vietnam. It may help to save other 
small countries from the fate of Vietnam, and indeed, to save 
the world from indescribable catastrophe. 


400 



EPILOGUE 


As the great peasant revolutions raged in China more than a 
century ago, Karl Marx wrote in the New York Tribune about 

the effect the Chinese revolution seems likely to exercise on the 
civilized world. It may seem a strange and a very paradoxical 
assertion that the next uprising of the people of Europe, and their 
next movement for republican freedom and economy of govern¬ 
ment, may depend more on what is now passing in the Celestial 
Empire—the very opposite of Europe—than on any other politi¬ 
cal cause that now exists. . . . Now, England having brought 
about the revolution in China, the question is how that revolution 
will in time react on England, and through England on Eu¬ 
rope. 

A few years later he discussed the “curious spectacle” of “China 
sending disorder into the Western world while the Western 
Powers, by English, French, and American war steamers, are 
conveying ‘order’ to Shanghai, Nanking, and the mouths of the 
Great Canal.” 

As in other respects, the timetable that Marx envisioned was 

401 







^ - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

in error, and the cast of characters has now somewhat changed. 
Furthermore, what Marx had in mind was the possibility that 
an economic crisis might be caused in the West by a successful 
revolution in China, endangering the China trade, the impor¬ 
tance of which, in the fashion of most writers on this matter 
until fairly recently, he tended to exaggerate. Still, it is well to 
consider today the remarkable spectacle of the disorder created in 
the Western world as the attempt to convey order to Asian 
countries—the very opposite of the West—is proving to be be¬ 
yond the power of Western imperialism. In part, the disorder is 
rooted in revulsion, and to this extent is a tribute to a strain of 
decency in Western culture, difficult as it is to pronounce these 
words amidst the barbarism of the Vietnam war. The disorder 
spreading through the Western world is not solely or even pri¬ 
