He sees nothing in Russian conduct in Spain to indicate any 
interest in a “people’s revolution.” Rather, the Communist pol¬ 
icy was to oppose “even such rural and industrial collectives as 
had risen spontaneously and flood the country with police who, 
like the Russian Ogpu, acted on the orders of their party rather 
than those of the Ministry of the Interior.” The Communists 
were concerned to suppress altogether the impulses towards 
“spontaneity of speech or action,” since “their whole nature and 
history made them distrust the local and spontaneous and put 
their faith in order, discipline and bureaucratic uniformity” 
—hence placed them in opposition to the revolutionary forces 
in Spain. As Brenan also notes, the Russians withdrew their 
support once it became clear that the British would not be 
swayed from the policy of appeasement, a fact which gives 
additional confirmation to the thesis that only considerations of 
Russian foreign policy led the Soviet Union to support the Re¬ 
public. 

Borkenau’s analysis is similar. He approves of the Communist 
policy, because of its “efficiency,” but he points out that the 
Communists “put an end to revolutionary social activity, and 
enforced their view that this ought not to be a revolution but 


84 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


simply the defence of a legal government. . . . communist policy 
in Spain was mainly dictated not by the necessities of the Span¬ 
ish fight but by the interests of the intervening foreign power, 
Russia,” a country “with a revolutionary past, not a revolution¬ 
ary present.” The Communists acted “not with the aim of trans¬ 
forming chaotic enthusiasm into disciplined enthusiasm [which 
Borkenau feels to have been necessary], but with the aim of 
substituting disciplined military and administrative action for 
the action of the masses and getting rid of the latter entirely.” 
This policy, he points out, went “directly against the interests 
and claims of the masses” and thus weakened popular support. 
The now apathetic masses would not commit themselves to the 
defense of a Communist-run dictatorship, which restored former 
authority and even “showed a definite preference for the police 
forces of the old regime, so hated by the masses.” It seems to 
me that the record strongly supports this interpretation of 
Communist policy and its effects, though Borkenau’s assump¬ 
tion that Communist “efficiency” was necessary to win the anti- 
Franco struggle is much more dubious—a question to which I 
return below. 75 
