
*= AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

ventionist,” recognizing “that it goes counter to all the tradi¬ 
tional conventions of diplomatic usage.” Some may ask whether 
“we have the moral right to interfere in the properly autono¬ 
mous affairs of others,” but Henderson feels that the Com¬ 
munist threat fully justifies such interference and urges that we 
be ready to “use our ‘special forces’ when the next bell rings,” 
with no moral qualms or hesitation. The second barrier is that 
“our knowledge is pitifully inadequate.” He therefore calls on 
the academic community, which will be only too willing to 
oblige, to supply “the body of expertise and the corps of spe¬ 
cialists,” the knowledge, the practitioners, and the teachers, to 
enable us to conduct such a “resourceful diplomacy” more 
effectively. 

Turning to the liberal wing, we find that Roger Hilsman has a 
rather similar message in his study of the diplomacy of the 
Kennedy administration, To Move a Nation. He informs us that 
the most divisive issue among the “hardheaded and pragmatic 
liberals” of the Kennedy team was how the United States 
should deal with the problem of “modern guerrilla warfare, as 
the Communists practice it.” The problem is that this “is inter¬ 
nal war, an ambiguous aggression that avoids direct and open 
attack violating international frontiers” (italics his). Appar¬ 
ently, the hardheaded and pragmatic liberals were never di¬ 
vided on the issue of our right to violate international frontiers 
in reacting to such “internal war.” As a prime example of the 
“kind of critical, searching analysis” that the new, liberal, re¬ 
vitalized State Department was trying to encourage, Hilsman 
cites a study directed to showing how the United States might 
have acted more effectively to overthrow the Mossadegh gov¬ 
ernment in Iran. Allen Dulles was “fundamentally right,” ac¬ 
cording to Hilsman, in judging that Mossadegh in Iran (like 
Arbenz in Guatemala) had come to power (to be sure, 


60 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


“through the usual processes of government”) with “the inten¬ 
tion of creating a Communist state”—a most amazing statement 
on the part of the State Department chief of intelligence; and 
Dulles was fundamentally right in urging support from the 
United States “to loyal anti-Communist elements” in Iran and 
Guatemala to meet the danger, even though “no invitation was 
extended by the government in power,” obviously. Hilsman ex¬ 
presses the liberal view succinctly in the distinction he draws 
between the Iranian subversion and the blundering attempt at 
the Bay of Pigs: “It is one thing ... to help the Shah’s support¬ 
ers in Iran in their struggle against Mossadegh and his Com¬ 
munist allies, but it is something else again to sponsor a thou¬ 
sand-man invasion against Castro’s Cuba, where there was no 
effective internal opposition.” The former effort was admirable; 
the latter, bound to fail, “is something else again” from the 
point of view of pragmatic liberalism. 

In Vietnam liberal interventionism was not properly con¬ 
ducted, and the situation got out of hand. We learn more about 
the character of this approach to international affairs by study¬ 
ing a more successful instance. Thailand is a case in point, and 
a useful perspective on liberal American ideology is given by 
the careful and informative work of Frank C. Darling, a Ken¬ 
nedy liberal who was a CIA analyst for Southeast Asia and is 
now chairman of the political science department at DePauw 
University. 40 

The facts relevant to this discussion, as Darling outlines 
them, are briefly as follows. At the end of World War II the 
former British minister, Sir Josiah Crosby, warned that unless 
the power of the Thai armed forces was reduced, “the estab¬ 
lishment of a constitutional government would be doomed and 
the return of a military dictatorship would be inevitable.” 
American policy in the postwar period was to support and 


61 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


strengthen the armed forces and the police, and Crosby’s pre¬ 
diction was borne out. 

There were incipient steps towards constitutional government 
in the immediate postwar period. However, a series of military 
coups established Phibun Songkhram, who had collaborated 
with the Japanese during the war, as premier in 1948, aborting 
these early efforts. The American reaction to the liberal gov¬ 
ernments had been ambiguous and “temporizing.” In contrast, 
Phibun was immediately recognized by the United States. 
Why? “Within this increasingly turbulent region Thailand was 
