this arena, and the resort to violence, which will surely fail, will 
simply frighten and alienate some who can be reached, and will 


374 


On Resistance 


further encourage the ideologists and administrators of forceful 
repression. What is more, one hopes that participants in non¬ 
violent resistance will themselves become human beings of a 
more admirable sort. No one can fail to be impressed by the 
personal qualities of those who have grown to maturity in the 
civil rights movement. Whatever else it may have accom¬ 
plished, the civil rights movement has made an inestimable 
contribution to American society in transforming the lives and 
characters of those who took part in it. Perhaps a program of 
principled, nonviolent resistance can do the same for many 
others, in the particular circumstances that we face today. It is 
not impossible that this may save the country from a terrible 
future, from yet another generation of men who think it clever 
to discuss the bombing of North Vietnam as a question of tac¬ 
tics and cost-effectiveness, or who support our attempt to con¬ 
quer South Vietnam, with the human cost that they well know, 
blandly asserting that “our primary motivation is self-interest— 
the self-interest of our own country in this shrinking world” 
(Citizens Committee for Peace with Freedom, New York 
Times , October 26, 1967). 

Returning to the demonstrations, I must admit that I was 
relieved to find people whom I had respected for years in the 
prison dormitory—Norman Mailer, Jim Peck, Dave Dellinger, 
and a number of others. I think it was reassuring to many of the 
kids who were there to be able to feel that they were not totally 
disconnected from a world that they knew and from people 
whom they admired. It was moving to see that defenseless 
young people who had a great deal to lose w r ere willing to be 
jailed for what they believed—young instructors from state uni¬ 
versities, college kids who have a very bright future if they are 
willing to toe the line, many others whom I could not identify. 

What comes next? Obviously, that is the question on every- 


375 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


★= 

one’s mind. The slogan “From Dissent to Resistance” makes 
sense, I think, but I hope it is not taken to imply that dissent 
should cease. Dissent and resistance are not alternatives but 
activities that should reinforce each other. There is no reason 
why those who take part in tax refusal, draft resistance, and 
other forms of resistance should not also speak to church groups 
or town forums, or become involved in electoral politics to sup¬ 
port peace candidates or referenda on the war. In my experi¬ 
ence, it has often been those committed to resistance who have 
been most deeply involved in such attempts at persuasion. Put¬ 
ting aside the matter of resistance for a moment, I think it 
should be emphasized that the days of “patiently explain” are 
far from over. As the coffins come home and the taxes go up, 
many people who were previously willing to accept government 
propaganda will become increasingly concerned to try to think 
for themselves. The reasons for their change are unfortunate; 
the opportunities for educational activity are nevertheless very 
good. 

Furthermore, the recent shift in the government’s propa¬ 
ganda line offers important opportunities for critical analysis of 
the war. There is a note of shrill desperation in the recent 
defense of the American war in Vietnam. We hear less about 
“bringing freedom and democracy” to the South Vietnamese 
and more about the “national interest.” Secretary Rusk broods 
about the dangers posed to us by a billion Chinese; the Vice- 
President tells us that we are fighting “militant Asian Commu¬ 
nism” with “its headquarters in Peking” and adds that a Viet- 
cong victory would directly threaten the United States; Eugene 
Rostow argues that “it is no good building model cities if they 
are to be bombed in twenty years time,” and so on (all of this 
“a frivolous insult to the United States Navy,” as Walter Lipp- 
mann rightly commented). 


376 



On Resistance 


This shift in propaganda makes it much easier for critical 
analysis to attack the problem of Vietnam at its core, which is in 
Washington and Boston, not in Saigon and Hanoi. There is 
something ludicrous, after all, in the close attention that oppo¬ 
