
As a Social Democrat I speak here with inner joy and sincere 
admiration of my experience in Catalonia. The anti-capitalist trans¬ 
formation took place here without their having to resort to a dictator¬ 
ship. The members of the syndicates are their own masters, and carry 
on production and the distribution of the products of labor under their 
own management with the advice of technical experts in whom they 
have confidence. The enthusiasm of the workers is so great that they 
scorn any personal advantage and are concerned only for the welfare 
of all. 

Even Borkenau concludes, rather grudgingly, that industry was func¬ 
tioning fairly well, as far as he could see. The matter deserves a 
serious study. 

82. Quoted in Richards, op . cit., pp. 46—47. 

83. Ibid. Richards suggests that the refusal of the central government 
to support the Aragon front may have been motivated in part by the 
general policy of counterrevolution. ‘‘This front, largely manned by 
members of the C.N.T.-F.A.I., was considered of great strategic im¬ 
portance by the anarchists, having as its ultimate objective the linking 
of Catalonia with the Basque country and Asturias, i.e., a linking of 
the industrial region [of Catalonia] w r ith an important source of raw 
materials.” Again, it would be interesting to undertake a detailed in¬ 
vestigation of this topic. 

That the Communists withheld arms from the Aragon front seems 
established beyond question, and it can hardly be doubted that the 
motivation was political. See, for example, D. T. Cattell, Communism 
and the Spanish Civil War (1955; reprinted New York, Russell and 
Russell, Publishers, 1965), p. 110. Cattell, who in general bends over 
backwards to try to justify the behavior of the central government, 
concludes that in this case there is little doubt that the refusal of aid 
was politically motivated. Brenan takes the same view, claiming that 
the Communists “kept the Aragon front without arms to spite the 
Anarchists.” The Communists resorted to some of the most grotesque 

143 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


slanders to explain the lack of arms on the Aragon front; for example, 
the Daily Worker attributed the arms shortage to the fact that “the 
Trotskyist General Kopp had been carting enormous supplies of arms 
and ammunition across no-man’s land to the fascists” (cited by Mor¬ 
row, op. cit., p. 145). As Morrow points out, George Kopp is a 
particularly bad choice as a target for such accusations. His record is 
well known, for example, from the account given by Orwell, who 
served under his command (see Orwell, op. cit., pp. 209 f.). Orwell 
was also able to refute, from firsthand observation, many of the other 
absurdities that were appearing in the liberal press about the Aragon 
front, for example, the statement by Ralph Bates in the New Republic 
that the POUM troops were “playing football with the Fascists in no 
man’s land.” At that moment, as Orwell observes, “the P.O.U.M. 
troops were suffering heavy casualties and a number of my personal 
friends were killed and wounded.” 

84. Cited in Living Marxism , p. 172. 

85. Bolloten, op. cit., p. 49, comments on the collectivization of the 
dairy trade in Barcelona, as follows: “The Anarchosyndicalists elimi¬ 
nated as unhygienic over forty pasteurizing plants, pasteurized all the 
milk in the remaining nine, and proceeded to displace all dealers by 
establishing their own dairies. Many of the retailers entered the collec¬ 
tive, but some refused to do so: ‘They asked for a much higher wage 
than that paid to the workers . . . , claiming that they could not 
manage on the one allotted to them’ [ Tierra y Libertad , August 21, 
1937—the newspaper of the FAI, the anarchist activists].” His infor¬ 
mation is primarily from anarchist sources, which he uses much more 
extensively than any historian other than Peirats. He does not present 
any evaluation of these sources, which—like all others—must be used 
critically. 

86. Morrow, op. cit., p. 136. 

87. Borkenau, The Spanish Cockpit, p. 182. 

88. Ibid., p. 183. 

89. Ibid., p. 184. According to Borkenau, “it is doubtful whether 
Comorera is personally responsible for this scarcity; it might have 
arisen anyway, in pace with the consumption of the harvest.” This 
speculation may or may not be correct. Like Borkenau, we can only 
speculate as to whether the village and workers’ committees would 
have been able to continue to provision Barcelona, with or without 
central administration, had it not been for the policy of “abstract 


144 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


liberalism,” which was of a piece with the general Communist-directed 
attempts to destroy the Revolutionary organizations and the structures 
developed in the Revolutionary period. 
