nam—a Voice from the Villages,” c/o Mrs. Reiko Ishida, 2-13-7, 
Nishikata, Bunkyo-Ku, Tokyo. 


158 


THE REVOLUTIONARY PACIFISM 
OF A. J. MUSTE 


ON THE BACKGROUNDS 

OF THE PACIFIC WAR 


INTRODUCTORY COMMENT 

The title and subtitle of this essay may seem unrelated; hence 
a word of explanation may be useful. The essay was written for 
a memorial number of Liberation which, as the editor expressed 
it, “gathered together a series of articles that deal with some of 
the problems with which A. J. struggled.” I think that Muste’s 
revolutionary pacifism was, and is, a profoundly important doc¬ 
trine, both in the political analysis and the moral conviction that 
it expresses. The circumstances of the antifascist war subjected it 
to the most severe of tests. Does it survive this test? When I 
began working on this article I was not at all sure. I still feel 
quite ambivalent about the matter. There are several points that 
seem to me fairly clear, however. The American reaction to 
Japan’s aggressiveness was, in a substantial measure, quite 

This essay first appeared in Liberation, Vol. 12 (September-October 1967). 
I am indebted to Herbert Bix, Louis Kampf, Andre Schiffrin, and John Viertel 
for comments that were useful in revising it to its present form. 


159 







★== 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


hypocritical. Worse still, there are very striking, quite distressing 
similarities between Japan’s escapades and our own—both in 
character and in rationalization—with the fundamental differ¬ 
ence that Japan’s appeal to national interest, which was not 
totally without merit, becomes merely ludicrous when translated 
into a justification for American conquests in Asia. 

This essay touches on all of these questions: on Muste’s revo¬ 
lutionary pacifism and his interpretation of it in connection with 
the Second World War; on the backgrounds of Japan’s imperial 
ventures; on the Western reaction and responsibility; and, by 
implication, on the relevance of these matters to the problems 
of contemporary imperialism in Asia. No doubt the essay 
would be more coherent were it limited to one or two of these 
themes. I am sure that it would be more clear if it advocated a 
particular “political line.” After exploring these themes, I can 
suggest nothing more than the tentative remarks of the final 
paragraph. 


In a crucial essay written forty years ago , 1 A. J. Muste ex¬ 
plained the concept of revolutionary nonviolence that was the 
guiding principle of an extraordinary life. “In a world built on 
violence, one must be a revolutionary before one can be a paci¬ 
fist.” “There is a certain indolence in us, a wish not to be dis¬ 
turbed, which tempts us to think that when things are quiet, all 
is well. Subconsciously, we tend to give the preference to ‘social 
peace,’ though it be only apparent, because our lives and pos¬ 
sessions seem then secure. Actually, human beings acquiesce 
too easily in evil conditions; they rebel far too little and too 
seldom. There is nothing noble about acquiescence in a 
cramped life or mere submission to superior force.” Muste was 


160 


The Revolutionary Pacifism of A. J. Muste 


insistent that pacifists “get our thinking focussed.” Their fore¬ 
most task “is to denounce the violence on which the present 
system is based, and all the evil—material and spiritual—this 
entails for the masses of men throughout the world. ... So long 
as we are not dealing honestly and adequately with this ninety 
percent of our problem, there is something ludicrous, and per¬ 
haps hypocritical, about our concern over the ten percent of 
violence employed by the rebels against oppression.” Never in 
American history have these thoughts been so tragically appro¬ 
