Jackson presumes (p. 259) that Soviet support for the Repub¬ 
lican cause in Spain was guided by two factors: first, concern 
for Soviet security; second, the hope that a Republican victory 
would advance “the cause of worldwide people’s revolution’ 
with which Soviet leaders hoped to identify themselves.” They 
did not press their revolutionary aims, he feels, because “for the 
moment it was essential not to frighten the middle classes or the 
Western governments.” 

As to the concern for Soviet security, Jackson is no doubt 
correct. It is clear that Soviet support of the Republic was one 
aspect of the attempt to make common cause with the Western 
democracies against the fascist threat. However, Jackson’s con¬ 
ception of the Soviet Union as a revolutionary power—hopeful 
that a Republican victory would advance “the interrupted 
movement toward world revolution” and seeking to identify it¬ 
self with “the cause of the world-wide ‘people’s revolution’ ” 
—seems to me entirely mistaken. Jackson presents no evidence 
to support this interpretation of Soviet policy, nor do I know of 
any. It is interesting to see how differently the events were 
interpreted at the time of the Spanish Civil War, not only by 
anarchists like Rocker but also by such commentators as Gerald 
Brenan and Franz Borkenau, who were intimately acquainted 
with the situation in Spain. Brenan observes that the counter¬ 
revolutionary policy of the Communists (which he thinks was 
“extremely sensible”) was 


83 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


the policy most suited to the Communists themselves. Russia is a 
totalitarian regime ruled by a bureaucracy: the frame of mind of 
its leaders, who have come through the most terrible upheaval in 
history, is cynical and opportunist: the whole fabric of the state 
is dogmatic and authoritarian. To expect such men to lead a 
social revolution in a country like Spain, where the wildest ideal¬ 
ism is combined with great independence of character, was out of 
the question. The Russians could, it is true, command plenty of 
idealism among their foreign admirers, but they could only 
harness it to the creation of a cast-iron bureaucratic state, where 
everyone thinks alike and obeys the orders of the chief above 
him . 74 


He sees nothing in Russian conduct in Spain to indicate any 
interest in a “people’s revolution.” Rather, the Communist pol¬ 
icy was to oppose “even such rural and industrial collectives as 
had risen spontaneously and flood the country with police who, 
like the Russian Ogpu, acted on the orders of their party rather 
than those of the Ministry of the Interior.” The Communists 
were concerned to suppress altogether the impulses towards 
“spontaneity of speech or action,” since “their whole nature and 
history made them distrust the local and spontaneous and put 
their faith in order, discipline and bureaucratic uniformity” 
—hence placed them in opposition to the revolutionary forces 
in Spain. As Brenan also notes, the Russians withdrew their 
support once it became clear that the British would not be 
swayed from the policy of appeasement, a fact which gives 
additional confirmation to the thesis that only considerations of 
Russian foreign policy led the Soviet Union to support the Re¬ 
public. 

Borkenau’s analysis is similar. He approves of the Communist 
policy, because of its “efficiency,” but he points out that the 
Communists “put an end to revolutionary social activity, and 
enforced their view that this ought not to be a revolution but 


84 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


simply the defence of a legal government. . . . communist policy 
in Spain was mainly dictated not by the necessities of the Span¬ 
ish fight but by the interests of the intervening foreign power, 
Russia,” a country “with a revolutionary past, not a revolution¬ 
ary present.” The Communists acted “not with the aim of trans¬ 
forming chaotic enthusiasm into disciplined enthusiasm [which 
Borkenau feels to have been necessary], but with the aim of 
substituting disciplined military and administrative action for 
the action of the masses and getting rid of the latter entirely.” 
This policy, he points out, went “directly against the interests 
and claims of the masses” and thus weakened popular support. 
The now apathetic masses would not commit themselves to the 
defense of a Communist-run dictatorship, which restored former 
authority and even “showed a definite preference for the police 
forces of the old regime, so hated by the masses.” It seems to 
me that the record strongly supports this interpretation of 
Communist policy and its effects, though Borkenau’s assump¬ 
tion that Communist “efficiency” was necessary to win the anti- 
Franco struggle is much more dubious—a question to which I 
return below. 75 
