This agony is shared by the most perceptive observers of the 
Vietnam tragedy, even those who are basically in support of the 
American military intervention. Bernard Fall, for example, in 
one of his last articles warned that “it is Viet-Nam as a cultural 
and historic entity which is threatened with extinction,” as “the 
countryside literally dies under the blows of the largest military 
machine ever unleashed on an area of this size.” 42 It is ap¬ 
palling beyond words that we permit this to continue. 

When one tries to see what lies behind the official govern¬ 
ment reports, this is the sort of picture that emerges. Of course, 
it is not the picture that the government seeks to present, nor 
the one that it succeeds, by and large, in presenting, given the 


239 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


enormous propaganda apparatus at its command. It is to the 
great credit of the American press that it does still provide 
information on the basis of which one who is willing to put in 
the time and effort can arrive at some understanding of what is 
taking place in Vietnam. But we must recognize that valuable 
as this is, it has little bearing on the state of American democ¬ 
racy, since the opportunity to do the research that is required to 
separate fact from propaganda is limited to a privileged few. 

In the light of what we have seen in the past three years, it is 
difficult to become excited over such matters as the ambiguity, 
or duplicity, of the American government position on the Gen¬ 
eva agreements, or the numerous violations of domestic and 
international law that have accompanied our intervention in the 
internal affairs of Vietnam. Nevertheless, these matters, and in 
particular the reaction as they have become too clear to over¬ 
look, are quite revealing for anyone concerned with the Ameri¬ 
can war in Vietnam and its implications for the future. It was, 
at one time, quite normal to denounce the “Communists” for 
their disregard of international law and treaty obligations. Now, 
how r ever, many Americans tend to scoff at such matters as irrele¬ 
vant, unrealistic. Suddenly, the Constitution and the system of 
treaties to which we have committed ourselves—the United Na¬ 
tions Charter in particular—have become “outmoded,” inap¬ 
propriate to the complexities of current history, which require a 
powerful executive, free to react with overwhelming military 
force to real or alleged “emergencies” and “attacks”—such as 
the alleged Tonkin Bay attack. In the world-dominant power, 
this disregard for the formalities must cause very great con¬ 
cern. 

Randolph Bourne once warned of the intellectuals who “tell 
us that our war of all wars is stainless and thrillingly achieving 
for good”; we have a right to become even more alarmed when 


240 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


they tell us (not in so many words, to be sure, but by the 
policies they advocate) that our national self-interest requires 
that we tear to shreds the delicate fabric of international law 
and disregard our treaty commitments and constitutional pro¬ 
cesses. Granting the inadequacies and frequent injustice of in¬ 
ternational law and the institutions set up to give it substance, 
there is still much truth in the conclusion of the Lawyers Com¬ 
mittee on American Policy in Vietnam: . . the tragedy in 

Vietnam reveals that the rules of law, when so flagrantly disre¬ 
garded, have a way of reasserting the calm wisdom underlying 
their creation. If international law had been followed, both 
Vietnam and the American people would have been spared 
what Secretary General U Thant has described as ‘one of the 
most barbarous wars in history. 5 5,43 

The disregard for law and treaty was illustrated strikingly by 
our behavior with respect to the Geneva agreements of 1954. 
Much has been made of the fact that in a technical sense we 
did not clearly commit ourselves to uphold these agreements. 
The record, however, must not be forgotten by those who are 
concerned to restore a measure of decency to our international 
behavior. At Geneva, Mr. Bedell Smith did explicitly commit 
the United States to observe the French-Vietnamese Agreement 
on Cessation of Hostilities and paragraphs 1-12 of the Final 
Declaration of the Conference (pointedly omitted was para¬ 
graph 13, which provided for consultations “to ensure that the 
agreements ... are respected, 55 an interesting omission, in the 
light of subsequent attempts to achieve a negotiated settle¬ 
ment). The Final Declaration states that “the military demarca¬ 
tion line is provisional and should not in any way be interpreted 
as constituting a political or territorial boundary, 55 and calls for 
elections under international control as part of a political set¬ 
tlement based on “the principles of independence, unity and 

