Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


they approve of our violence in Vietnam, which, as they are 
well aware, enormously exceeds that of the Vietnamese enemy. 
To further underline this point, they cite as our greatest tri¬ 
umph in Southeast Asia the “dramatic changes” which have 
taken place in Indonesia—the most dramatic being the mas¬ 
sacre of several hundred thousand people. But this massacre, 
like our extermination of Vietnamese, is not a use of violence to 
effect social change and is therefore legitimate. What is more, it 
may be that those massacred were largely ethnic Chinese and 
landless peasants, and that the “countercoup” in effect re-estab¬ 
lished traditional authority more firmly. 19 If so, all the more 
reason why we should not deplore this use of violence; and in 
fact, the moderate scholars delicately refrain from alluding to it 
in their discussion of dramatic changes in Indonesia. We must 
conclude that when these scholars deplore the use of violence to 
effect change, it is not the violence but rather steps toward social 
change that they find truly disturbing. Social change that de¬ 
parts from the course we plot is not to be tolerated. The threat 
to order is too great. 

So great is the importance of stability and order that even 
reform of the sort that receives American authorization must 
often be delayed, the moderate scholars emphasize. “Indeed, 
many types of reform increase instability, however desirable 
and essential they may be in long-range terms. For people 
under siege, there is no substitute for security.” The reference, 
needless to say, is not to security from American bombardment, 
but rather to security from the wrong sorts of political and 
social change. 

The policy recommendations of the moderate scholars are 
based on their particular ideological bias, namely, that a certain 
form of stability—not that of North Vietnam or North Korea, 
but that of Thailand, Taiwan, or the Philippines—is so essential 


35 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


that we must be willing to use our unparalleled means of vio¬ 
lence to ensure that it is preserved. It is instructive to see how 
other mentors of the new mandarins describe the problem of 
