from the turbulent Indian tribes,” as they fight a war where “an 
American can’t tell the VC from the ‘friendlies,’ ” where “the smiling 
face of the farmer on his water buffalo beyond the airstrip fence could 
be a VC who plans to throw T a grenade at you or your airplane,” where 
the Tri Quang Buddhists have “become an instrument in the hands of 
the enemies of the people of South Viet Nam,” where “the agitation 
over gas is another reminder that protecting a people against commu¬ 
nist aggression usually is a thankless job,” etc., etc. 

43. Richard A. Falk et al. f Vietnam and International Law (Flanders, 
N.J., O’Hare Books, 1967), p. 85. 

44. “United States Policy and Vietnamese Political Viability,” 1954— 
1967, Asian Survey , Vol. 7 (August 1967), pp. 507-14. He adds the 
obscure remark that if this independent South Vietnam were viable, 
strong, popular, enlightened, and effective, “then the foreign and dip¬ 
lomatic repercussions of two Vietnams de facto would be easier to 
handle, particularly for regulating the relations between North and 
South Vietnam in future consultations and elections which we in 
Washington envisaged coming at some time, perhaps in 1956 or possi¬ 
bly a little later.” But the Geneva agreements that we were pledged to 
uphold say nothing about “two Vietnams de facto” nor about an 
“independent South Vietnam” as “a strong, viable state.” Obviously, it 
is absurd to speak of a viable, independent state bounded by a provi¬ 
sional demarcation line which “should not in any way be interpreted 
as constituting a political or territorial boundary.” It is interesting, 
incidentally, that Mr. Young can summarize the American effort to 
“promote political viability” in Vietnam from 1954 to 1967 with not a 
mention of what happened to those elections that were “envisaged 
coming ... in 1956 or possibly a little later.” 

Richard Falk has commented on the hypocrisy of the accusation 
that North Vietnam challenged world order by its “indirect aggres- 


280 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


sion” in South Vietnam in the 1960s, noting that “In Viet Nam 
Saigon’s establishment, rather than the subsequent attempt at its re¬ 
moval, of a political frontier at the seventeenth parallel represented 
the coercive challenge to world order,” since the “political settlement 
at Geneva in 1954 provided a formula for the nullification (rather 
than one for the maintenance) of the division” (“International Law and 
the United States Role in Vietnam,” Yale Law Journal, Vol. 76 [May 
1967], p. 1118). Similarly, the United States effort to build up the 
military strength of the Saigon regime, which enabled it to crush 
domestic opposition and institute the “grim dictatorship” that support¬ 
ers of the American effort were later to deplore, was a clear violation 
of our pledge at Geneva not to use force or threat of force to disturb 
the accords. Secretary Dulles was as candid as Kenneth Young about 
our intention to disregard the Geneva agreements, announcing our 
intention to build up “the truly independent states of Cambodia, Laos 
and southern Vietnam” ( Department of State Bulletin, August 2, 
1954, cited in George M. Kahin and John W. Lewis, The United 
States and Vietnam [New York, The Dial Press, 1967], p. 61). 

It is, incidentally, remarkable that our professed dissatisfaction with 
the accords and announced intention not to observe them is often 
cited today as somehow relieving us from the obligation to honor 
them, as eliminating any onus for this violation. 

45. Cited in R. Scigliano, op. cit., p. 196, from Philippe Devillers 
and Jean Lacouture, La Fin (Pune guerre: Indochina, 1954 (Paris, Edi¬ 
tions du Seuil, 1960). 

46. “Vietnam: the Agonizing Reappraisal,” Current History, Vol. 48 
(February 1965), pp. 95-102. In his The Two Vietnams, rev. ed. 
(New York, Frederick A. Praeger, Inc., 1964), Fall asserts (p. 402) 
that “the infiltration of guerrilla teams” to the North “has been repeat¬ 
edly attempted over the past years and has met with dismal failure. . . . 
Present losses are estimated to run at 85% of the total personnel 
engaged in such operations.” This despite “the air of massive tran¬ 
quillity” that he himself observed in a visit to North Vietnam in the 
fall of 1962, when these operations were in progress: “. . . no guards 
in watchtowers, no airplane patrols. The Hanoi police don’t even carry 
pistols” ( Saturday Evening Post, November 24, 1962, pp. 18-21). Cf. 
the recent eyewitness accounts by David Schoenbrun and others, not¬ 
ing the same phenomenon, which Fall characterizes as “one of the 
most ominous things about North Vietnam.” 


281 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


47. Richard Goodwin, Triumph or Tragedy (New York, Vintage 
Books, 1966), p. 26. There are many other such reports. To mention a 
recent one, Louis Heren writes in the London Times, April 20, 1968, 
from Washington, that the CIA “did in fact deploy saboteurs in the 
North from 1959. They were parachuted in or dropped off the coast 
by patrol boats, and Vice-President Ky commanded the air transport 
