
AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


and helicopters can be used to control “the mobs.' 5 An accom¬ 
panying picture shows a “'simulated battle between militant 
civil rights demonstrators and the National Guardsmen. 5, The 
demonstrators hold a sign saying “We Shall Overcome 55 and the 
heavily armed soldiers, with gas masks and fixed bayonets, 
demonstrate how this slogan can be refuted. The description 
continues as follows: 

The clash is staged in a Hollywood type mockup of a community 
called Riotsville. . . . “Baby,” a firebrand militant .... harangues 
a crowd, charging policy brutality. The crowd waves signs de¬ 
nouncing war. One sign reads £ ‘We Shall Overcome.” Bricks and 
rocks ... are thrown at the “Mayor” when he tries to placate the 
mob. 

But here comes the National Guard. Using tear gas, bayonets, 
an armored personnel carrier, and classic antiriot tactics, the 
troops prevail. ‘“Baby” is seized and taken off in the armored car, 
a prisoner. 

Presumably the audience breathes a sigh of relief, sipping their 
coffee and munching on cookies to the strains of “The Stars and 
Stripes Forever 55 as the scene fades, secure in the knowledge 
that those who denounce war and poverty and racism shall not 
prevail—all of this certainly a reasonable forecast of what the 
future may hold. 

I do agree with Mr. X in his criticism of the tactic of escalat¬ 
ing confrontation that was proposed, at one time, by the loosely 
organized group called “The Resistance. 55 Confrontations will 
come quickly enough. The real task, for the present, is to organ¬ 
ize as large as possible a base of support for resistance—a pro¬ 
liferation of local resistance support groups linked together in a 
national network, with participation of white and black resis¬ 
ters, with adult middle-class support on and off campus, sub¬ 
stantial financial assistance, and personal involvement by peo¬ 
ple who feel that resistance can be made politically effective. 


396 


Supplement to “On Resistance 1 


who feel that they have a moral responsibility to give concrete 
