South Vietnam for the past year. But the symbolism of this act 
casts its shadow over any critique of American institutions. 
When the bombings of North Vietnam began, Jean Lacouture 
commented aptly that these acts, and the documents produced 
to justify them, simply reveal that the American leaders regard 
themselves as having the right to strike where and when they 
wish. They reveal, in effect, that these leaders regard the world 
as an American preserve, to be governed and organized in ac¬ 
cordance with superior American wisdom and to be controlled, 
if necessary, by American power. At this moment of national 
disgrace, as American technology is running amuck in Southeast 
Asia, a discussion of American schools can hardly avoid noting 
the fact that these schools are the first training ground for the 
troops that will enforce the muted, unending terror of the status 
quo in the coming years of a projected American century; for 
the technicians "who will be developing the means for extension 
of American power; for the intellectuals who can be counted 
on, in significant measure, to provide the ideological justifica¬ 
tion for this particular form of barbarism and to decry the 
irresponsibility and lack of sophistication of those who will find 
all of this intolerable and revolting. 

Thirty years ago, Franz Borkenau concluded a brilliant study 
of the crushing of the popular revolution in Spain with this 
comment: “In this tremendous contrast with previous revolu¬ 
tions one fact is reflected. Before these latter years, counter¬ 
revolution usually depended upon the support of reactionary 
powers, which were technically and intellectually inferior to the 
forces of revolution. This has changed with the advent of fas¬ 
cism. Now, every revolution is likely to meet the attack of the 
most modern, most efficient, most ruthless machinery yet in 
existence. It means that the age of revolutions free to evolve 
according to their own laws is over . 5,1 


310 


Some Thoughts on Intellectuals and the Schools 


It would have taken a fair amount of foresight, at that time, 
to realize that the prediction would be proved accurate, with 
substitution of “liberal imperialism” for “fascism,” and that the 
United States would, in a generation, be employing the most 
efficient and most ruthless machinery in existence to ensure that 
revolutionary movements will not evolve according to their own 
laws, to guarantee that its own particular concept of civilization 
and justice and order will prevail. And it would have required 
considerable insight, in the late 1930s, to realize that before too 
long a reformist American administration with a “welfare state” 
domestic orientation would be doing its utmost to prove the 
correctness of Marx’s grim observation about this concept of 
civilization and justice and order: “The civilization and justice 
of bourgeois order comes out in its lurid light whenever the 
slaves and drudges of that order rise against their masters; then 
this civilization and justice stand forth as undisguised savagery 
and lawless revenge.” 

It is conceivable that American actions in Vietnam are simply 
a single outburst of criminal insanity, of no general or long- 
range significance except to the miserable inhabitants of that 
tortured land. It is difficult, however, to put much credence in 
this possibility. In half a dozen Latin American countries there 
are guerrilla movements that are approaching the early stages of 
the second Vietnamese war, and the American reaction is, appar¬ 
ently, comparable. That is, American arms are used to attack 
guerrilla forces and to “dry up the sea in which they swim,” in 
the Maoist terminology affected by the military; and American 
“advisers” guide and train the troops which, as Latin American 
liberals observe, are needed only to occupy their own country in 
the interests of domestic ruling classes and Northern capital. In 
these countries it has not yet become necessary, as in Vietnam, 
to convert the fact of Communist involvement into the myth of 


311 


* - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

Communist aggression in justification of open United States 
control of the counterrevolutionary forces, nor has the time yet 
arrived for application of the full arsenal of terror in support of 
the regime selected as most favorable to American interests. But 
it seems that this next step is fully expected. In Le Nouvel 
Observateur, the peasant organizer Francisco Juliao was re¬ 
cently quoted as certain of United States intervention when 
rebellion breaks out in the Brazilian Northeast Provinces. 
Others, less well known, have expressed themselves similarly. 
There is little basis, in history or logic, for supposing them to be 
wrong—little basis, that is, apart from the kind of sentimental¬ 
ity that sees the United States, alone among nations, as a selfless 
(if rather oafish) public benefactor, devoted only to projects of 
“international good will,” though frequently blundering in an 
excess of warmhearted generosity. One should no doubt take 
seriously the insistence of administration spokesmen that one 
purpose of the present violence is to prove that wars of national 
liberation cannot succeed; to demonstrate, that is, in the clear¬ 
est and most explicit terms, that any revolutionary movement 
