the alleged Tonkin Bay attack. In the world-dominant power, 
this disregard for the formalities must cause very great con¬ 
cern. 

Randolph Bourne once warned of the intellectuals who “tell 
us that our war of all wars is stainless and thrillingly achieving 
for good”; we have a right to become even more alarmed when 


240 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


they tell us (not in so many words, to be sure, but by the 
policies they advocate) that our national self-interest requires 
that we tear to shreds the delicate fabric of international law 
and disregard our treaty commitments and constitutional pro¬ 
cesses. Granting the inadequacies and frequent injustice of in¬ 
ternational law and the institutions set up to give it substance, 
there is still much truth in the conclusion of the Lawyers Com¬ 
mittee on American Policy in Vietnam: . . the tragedy in 

Vietnam reveals that the rules of law, when so flagrantly disre¬ 
garded, have a way of reasserting the calm wisdom underlying 
their creation. If international law had been followed, both 
Vietnam and the American people would have been spared 
what Secretary General U Thant has described as ‘one of the 
most barbarous wars in history. 5 5,43 

The disregard for law and treaty was illustrated strikingly by 
our behavior with respect to the Geneva agreements of 1954. 
Much has been made of the fact that in a technical sense we 
did not clearly commit ourselves to uphold these agreements. 
The record, however, must not be forgotten by those who are 
concerned to restore a measure of decency to our international 
behavior. At Geneva, Mr. Bedell Smith did explicitly commit 
the United States to observe the French-Vietnamese Agreement 
on Cessation of Hostilities and paragraphs 1-12 of the Final 
Declaration of the Conference (pointedly omitted was para¬ 
graph 13, which provided for consultations “to ensure that the 
agreements ... are respected, 55 an interesting omission, in the 
light of subsequent attempts to achieve a negotiated settle¬ 
ment). The Final Declaration states that “the military demarca¬ 
tion line is provisional and should not in any way be interpreted 
as constituting a political or territorial boundary, 55 and calls for 
elections under international control as part of a political set¬ 
tlement based on “the principles of independence, unity and 

