the Spanish Civil War have by no means faded; witness the 
impact a few years ago of the film To Die in Madrid. Yet in this 
film (as Daniel Guerin points out) one finds no reference to the 
popular revolution that had transformed much of Spanish society. 

I will be concerned here with the events of 1936—1937, 61 and 
with one particular aspect of the complex struggle involving 
Franco Nationalists, Republicans (including the Communist 
party), anarchists, and socialist workers’ groups. The Franco 
insurrection in July 1936 came against a background of several 
months of strikes, expropriations, and battles between peasants 
and Civil Guards. The left-wing Socialist leader Largo Cabal¬ 
lero had demanded in June that the workers be armed, but was 
refused by Azana. When the coup came, the Republican gov¬ 
ernment was paralyzed. Workers armed themselves in Madrid 
and Barcelona, robbing government armories and even ships in 
the harbor, and put down the insurrection while the govern¬ 
ment vacillated, torn between the twin dangers of submitting to 


77 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


Franco and arming the working classes. In large areas of Spain 
effective authority passed into the hands of the anarchist and 
socialist workers who had played a substantial, generally domi¬ 
nant role in putting down the insurrection. 

The next few months have frequently been described as a 
period of “dual power.” In Barcelona industry and commerce 
were largely collectivized, and a wave of collectivization spread 
through rural areas, as well as towns and villages, in Aragon, 
Castile, and the Levant, and to a lesser but still significant 
extent in many parts of Catalonia, Asturias, Estremadura, and 
Andalusia. Military power was exercised by defense commit¬ 
tees; social and economic organization took many forms, fol¬ 
lowing in main outlines the program of the Saragossa Congress 
of the anarchist CNT in May 1936. The revolution was “apoliti¬ 
cal,” in the sense that its organs of power and administration 
remained separate from the central Republican government 
and, even after several anarchist leaders entered the government 
in the autumn of 1936, continued to function fairly independ¬ 
ently until the revolution was finally crushed between the 
fascist and Communist-led Republican forces. The success of 
collectivization of industry and commerce in Barcelona im¬ 
pressed even highly unsympathetic observers such as Borkenau. 
The scale of rural collectivization is indicated by these data 
