
Far from being naive, the analysis of the situation that leads 
to the call for withdrawal—not eventual but immediate—seems 
to me entirely realistic; and the dimensions of the Vietnamese 
tragedy are so awesome that whatever the prospects for success 
may be, the responsible citizen must spare no effort to create 
the political climate, the background of insight and understand¬ 
ing, in which this call will become a powerful one. The urgency 
of this matter can hardly be exaggerated. It seems unlikely that 
the Johnson administration will be willing to face the 1968 elec¬ 
tions with an unwinnable war on its hands. The prospects are 
therefore for sharp escalation, perhaps a forced confrontation 
with China. What is more, the rapid growth of Chinese nuclear 
weapon and missile capacity will surely suggest to Pentagon 
planners the need to act now, before the Chinese are in a posi¬ 
tion to hold an American army hostage on the fringes of Asia. 
With this prospect, attempts to predict what may happen 
next are as irrational as our Vietnamese policy itself. 

Zinn gives a concise but persuasive analysis of the political 
and moral character of the war, the international reaction, the 


224 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


justifications that are offered for persisting in the semiprinci- 
pled, semilunatic course of action in which we are now so 
heavily engaged. His general thesis seems to me entirely cor¬ 
rect. The issues are so grave that I would like to go well beyond 
the bounds of a review and indicate some of the directions in 
which his discussion might be extended and elaborated. 

What is the situation that American policy makers face in 
mid-1967? The American military takeover of “pacification” is a 
testimony to the failure, thus far, of the effort to impose a 
political solution by force on an unwilling population. Its true 
significance is tersely indicated by an unnamed American offi¬ 
cial in Saigon who comments: “We’ve been playing the be-nice- 
to-the-Asian game for ten years, and it’s been a flop. We can’t 
afford it any longer.” 5 The American chief of civil operations in 
the northernmost provinces attributes the failure of the “revolu¬ 
tionary development teams” to the “overwhelming corruption” 
of Vietnamese official life, to the failure to understand that 
“until there is a contented peasantry there is no room for the 
opulent society of the government of Vietnam.” 6 The same re¬ 
port in the Times goes on to give a dramatic example of the 
