wing of the South Vietnam Air Force in 1962 and 1963. He is known 
to have been in charge of the parachute drops. The agents were South 
Vietnamese and were trained by the C.I.A. in Special Forces camps, 
notably the 77th Special Forces Group. The frogmen were trained at 
Da Nang. Apart from destroying bridges and other vulnerable points, 
they were also expected to organize guerrilla warfare, especially in the 
Catholic areas. Both operations were a complete fiasco, 95 per cent 
casualties were admitted in 1963, but the opium trade flourished.” 
Heren’s report goes on to discuss the possible connection between 
these operations and the opium trade, and the reports under investiga¬ 
tion by a Senate subcommittee that Marshal Ky was dismissed from 
the operation for his participation in opium smuggling. 

48. Dean Rusk, December 5, 1966. Cited in Theodore Draper, Abuse 
of Power (New York, The Viking Press, Inc., 1967), p. 45. It is 
difficult to exaggerate the startling character of the material that 
Draper has assembled, particularly with respect to the pronounce¬ 
ments of Dean Rusk. 

49. New York Times , June 7, 1965. Polls taken for CBS in November 
1966 and February 1967 indicate that even “among strong anti-Com- 
munist South Vietnamese . . . exposed primarily to government propa¬ 
ganda there still appears to be a rejection of the American idea that 
the war is a consequence of ‘aggression from the North’ ” (Richard 
Falk, “International Law and the United States Role in Vietnam,” p. 
1102 n.). The results are reported in the Times , March 22, 1967. 
Even in this biased sample of South Vietnamese opinion, 83% were in 
favor of (and 5% opposed to) reunification with the North after the 
end of the war, and emphasis on negotiations was preferred to exten¬ 
sion of military operations to the North by a ratio of 4 to 1. 

The poll of Vietcong prisoners cited above showed that “few of 
them considered themselves Communists or could give a definition of 
Communism” and confirmed the judgments of most observers that 
■“the Vietcong function far more through persuasion and indoctrina- 


282 



The Logic of Withdrawal 


tion than through the authoritarianism of traditional armies.” It has 
often been emphasized, even by those committed to the American 
effort in Vietnam, that “it would be a serious mistake to consider 
Communist power in South Vietnam as based predominantly on ter¬ 
rorism or military strength, or even upon the indifference of an ignor¬ 
ant peasantry” (Scigliano, op. cit., p. 158). There is near unanimity, 
outside of the State Department, that “the historical fact is that force 
in the struggle for the South was first used by the Diem regime, not by 
the Communists,” that the latter was, moreover, far more restrained, 
that although “guidance and assistance from the North” may have 
been an important factor in the “amazing success” of the NLF, “it 
would have made little headway without wide popular support,” and 
that “the war started as a civil war in the South,” well before the 
alleged infiltration began (Joseph Buttinger, Vietnam: A Dragon Em¬ 
battled [New York, Frederick A. Praeger, Inc. 1967], Vol. 2, pp. 976 
f., 981-82). Buttinger’s study is quite interesting, not only for its 
careful and extensive scholarship but also because he was, for many 
years, a strong supporter of the Diem regime and the American in¬ 
volvement in support of it. He explains, for example, why Diem was 
unable to move towards democratic, representative structures: “Local 
elections would have given the Vietminh control of most of the rural 
communities. The Vietminh was not only popular and in effective 
political control of large regions, but it alone had people with the 
requisite organizational skills to exploit whatever opportunities for 
democratic self-expression the regime opened up.” Thus, “Freely con¬ 
stituted organizations too would have been captured by the Vietminh” 
(p. 856); he adds that “the NLF was truly the Vietminh reborn” and 
speaks of “the similarity, or better, near identity, of the Vietminh and 
the NLF.” He also analyzes the much greater economic progress in 
the North (cf. pp. 928, 966 f.), and notes that repression of dissidence 
in the North was less severe than in the South, largely, he feels, 
because dissidence was less dangerous (cf. pp. 964 f.). 

50. The thrust of “much of the American effort in Vietnam,” according to 
Scigliano, who served in the Michigan State University Advisory 
Group in Vietnam (op. cit., 1963, p. 197). In contrast, “precious little of 
American energies or resources has been devoted to political goals, as 
contrasted with the military and economic aims.” His detailed breakdown 
of aid figures shows that military aid was overwhelmingly dominant, even 

283 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


in “economic and social development/’ and that even true economic aid 
was largely directed to the relatively affluent. See pp. 135 f. for a 
summary. 

51. Saville Davis, Christian Science Monitor, October 21, 1967. 

52. “Not a Dove, But No Longer a Hawk,” New York Times Maga¬ 
zine, October 9, 1966. 

53. As to the military, Jonathan Randal points out in the New York 
