transformation of society. Now that we have achieved the plu¬ 
ralistic society of the welfare state, they see no further need for 
a radical transformation of society; we may tinker with our way 
of life here and there, but it would be wrong to try to modify it 
in any significant way. With this consensus of intellectuals, 
ideology is dead. 

There are several striking facts about Bell’s essay. First, he 
does not point out the extent to which this consensus of the 
intellectuals is self-serving. He does not relate his observation 
that, by and large, intellectuals have lost interest in “transform¬ 
ing the whole way of life” to the fact that they play an increas¬ 
ingly prominent role in running the welfare state; he does not 
relate their general satisfaction with the welfare state to the fact 
that, as he observes elsewhere, “America has become an affluent 
society, offering place . . . and prestige ... to the onetime 
radicals.” Secondly, he offers no serious argument to show that 
intellectuals are somehow “right” or “objectively justified” in 
reaching the consensus to which he alludes, with its rejection of 
the notion that society should be transformed. Indeed, although 
Bell is fairly sharp about the empty rhetoric of the “New Left,” 
he seems to have a quite utopian faith that technical experts 
will be able to come to grips with the few problems that still 
remain; for example, the fact that labor is treated as a commod¬ 
ity, and the problems of “alienation.” 

It seems fairly obvious that the classical problems are very 
much with us; one might plausibly argue that they have even 
been enhanced in severity and scale. For example, the classical 
paradox of poverty in the midst of plenty is now an ever in¬ 
creasing problem on an international scale. Whereas one might 


344 


The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


conceive, at least in principle, of a solution within national 
boundaries, a sensible idea as to how to transform international 
society in such a way as to cope with the vast and perhaps 
increasing human misery is hardly likely to develop within the 
framework of the intellectual consensus that Bell describes. 

Thus it would seem natural to describe the consensus of Bell’s 
intellectuals in somewhat different terms than his. Using the 
terminology of the first part of his essay, we might say that the 
welfare state technician finds justification for his special and 
prominent social status in his “science,” specifically, in the claim 
