
Supplement to “On Resistance” 


they arrive at diametrically opposed conclusions regarding the 
appropriate choice of tactics: Mr. Y opposes all forms of resist¬ 
ance and feels that one should try to convince the American 
people “that the war is damned foolishness,” and Mr. X con¬ 
cludes that the “most effective antiwar activities are those which 
are the most disruptive.” Viewing the situation from a rather 
similar perspective, I nevertheless find myself reaching still 
different conclusions. This is hardly astonishing. No one can 
evaluate the effectiveness of various tactics with any precision. 
Furthermore, no course of action open to us offers much hope 
of preventing the Vietnam tragedy from assuming still more 
awesome proportions. We are, unfortunately, discussing tactics 
of limited effectiveness and partially unpredictable conse¬ 
quences. 

I suspect that Mr. Y and Mr. X exaggerate the political signifi¬ 
cance of middle-class opinion. Even if 65 percent or 99 percent 
of the American people were convinced “that the war is 
damned foolishness,” there would remain the problem of trans¬ 
lating this conviction into politically effective action. It is 
doubtful that the political system provides this opportunity in a 
realistic way. Those who feel that an American “victory” in 
Vietnam would be a political and moral tragedy therefore face 
two kinds of tactical problem: first, how to bring “pragmatic 
middle-class opinion” to oppose the war; second, how to give 
effective political expression to such opposition as exists. I am 
not convinced that either correspondent is entirely realistic in 
assessing these matters. 

Consider first the matter of dissent. There is no need to try to 
persuade someone that his taxes are going up, that his neigh¬ 
bor’s son was killed, and that he doesn’t like it. Rather, I feel, 
dissent should be concerned with political and moral issues. 
The American government no doubt commands the resources to 


389 


- AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

end the war through annihilation, and Mr. Y overlooks the fact 
that those who feel that the war is “damned foolishness” may 
perfectly well accept this way of bringing it to an end. Suppose, 
for example, that the military were to decide that the use of 
tactical nuclear weapons would provide the cheapest means for 
