
90. Orwell, op. cit., pp. 109-11. Orwell’s description of Barcelona in 
December (pp. 4-5), when he arrived for the first time, deserves more 
extensive quotation: 

It was the first time that I had ever been in a town where the 
working class was in the saddle. Practically every building of any 
size had been seized by the workers and was draped with red flags or 
with the red and black flag of the Anarchists; every wall was 
scrawled with the hammer and sickle and with the initials of the 
revolutionary parties; almost every church had been gutted and its 
images burnt. Churches here and there were being systematically 
demolished by gangs of workmen. Every shop and cafe had an 
inscription saying that it had been collectivized; even the bootblacks 
had been collectivized and their boxes painted red and black. Waiters 
and shop-walkers looked you in the face and treated you as an equal. 
Servile and even ceremonial forms of speech had temporarily dis¬ 
appeared. Nobody said “Senor” or “Don” or even “Usted”; everyone 
called everyone else “Comrade” and “Thou,” and said “Salud!” instead 
of “Buenos dias.” Tipping had been forbidden by law since the time 
of Primo de Rivera; almost my first experience was receiving a 
lecture from an hotel manager for trying to tip a lift-boy. There 
were no private motor cars, they had all been commandeered, and all 
the trams and taxis and much of the other transport were painted 
red and black. The revolutionary posters were everywhere, flaming 
from the walls in clean reds and blues that made the few remaining 
advertisements look like daubs of mud. Down the Ramblas, the wide 
central artery of the town where crowds of people streamed con¬ 
stantly to and fro, the loud-speakers were bellowing revolutionary 
songs all day and far into the night. And it was the aspect of the 
crowds that was the queerest thing of all. In outward appearance it 
was a town in which the wealthy classes had practically ceased to 
exist. Except for a small number of women and foreigners there were 
no “well-dressed” people at all. Practically everyone wore rough 
working-class clothes, or blue overalls or some variant of the militia 
uniform. All this was queer and moving. There was much in it that 
I did not understand, in some ways I did not even like it, but I 
recognized it immediately as a state of affairs worth fighting for. Also 
I believed that things were as they appeared, that this was really 
a workers’ State and that the entire bourgeoisie had either fled, been 


145 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


killed, or voluntarily come over to the workers’ side; I did not realize 
that great numbers of well-to-do bourgeois were simply lying low and 
disguising themselves as proletarians for the time being . . . 

. . . waiting for that happy day when Communist power would rein¬ 
troduce the old state of society and destroy popular involvement in the 
war. 

In December 1936, however, the situation was still as described in 
the following remarks (p. 6): 

Yet so far as one can judge the people were contented and hopeful. 
There was no unemployment, and the price of living was still ex¬ 
tremely low; you saw very few conspicuously destitute people, and 
no beggars except the gipsies. Above all, there was a belief in the 
revolution and the future, a feeling of having suddenly emerged into 
an era of equality and freedom. Human beings were trying to behave 
as human beings and not as cogs in the capitalist machine. In the 
barbers’ shops were Anarchist notices (the barbers were mostly An¬ 
archists) solemnly explaining that barbers were no longer slaves. In 
the streets were coloured posters appealing to prostitutes to stop being 
prostitutes. To anyone from the hard-boiled, sneering civilization of the 
English-speaking races there was something rather pathetic in the 
literalness with which these idealistic Spaniards took the hackneyed 
phrases of revolution. At that time revolutionary ballads of the 
naiVest kind, all about proletarian brotherhood and the wickedness of 
Mussolini, were being sold on the streets for a few centimes each. I 
have often seen an illiterate militiaman buy one of these ballads, 
laboriously spell out the words, and then, when he had got the hang 
of it, begin singing it to an appropriate tune. 

Recall the dates. Orwell arrived in Barcelona in late December 1936. 
Comorera’s decree abolishing the workers’ supply committees and the 
bread committees was on January 7. Borkenau returned to Barcelona 
in mid-January; Orwell, in April. 

91. See Bolloten, op . cit., p. 74, citing the anarchist spokesman Juan 
Peiro, in September 1936. Like other anarchists and left-wing Social- 
lists, Peiro sharply condemns the use of force to introduce collectiviza¬ 
tion, taking the position that was expressed by most anarchists, as well 
as by left-wing socialists such as Ricardo Zabalza, general secretary of 
the Federation of Land Workers, who stated, on January 8, 1937: “I 
prefer a small, enthusiastic collective, formed by a group of active and 
honest workers, to a large collective set up by force and composed of 


146 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


