Times, June 11, 1967, that “only one officer above the rank of lieuten¬ 
ant colonel did not serve in the French army against the Vietminh in 
the French Indochina war.” Perhaps this is part of the reason why the 
ARVN army has little interest in the war, while “the Vietcong can 
take the same unwilling recruit and turn him into a tiger in six 
months” (American regimental adviser), as it may go part way to¬ 
wards explaining the desertion rates that Randal cites for the elite 
battalions in 1966: 22% for the armed forces as a whole, 31% for the 
rangers, 33% for the marines, and 45% for the airborne battalions. 

54. See Halberstam, op. cit., for some indication of the incredible 
corruption of those to whom he refers as “our Vietnamese.” Their 
cynicism has continually scandalized American reporters. Malcolm 
Browne, for example, reports that Vietnamese military officers have 
ordered hamlets “blown off the map” by American Skyraiders to cover 
cases of graft ( op . cit., p. 210). 

55. Kahin, op. cit. (see note 8), reports that the medical staff of Hue 
hospital estimated that “almost 90% of the w r ar casualties were occa¬ 
sioned by American and South Vietnamese army air bombardments 
and artillery,” and that an American working at Quangnai hospital 
“estimated that about 70% of all civilian war casualties had been 
inflicted by American, South Korean and South Vietnamese aerial 
bombardment and artillery.” Note that these estimates refer to areas 
more or less under American control, w r here victims can hope to reach 
the hospitals. What is amazing is that any substantial number of casu¬ 
alties in such areas are caused by American and allied forces. Even in 
Saigon hospital Kahin saw T many victims of napalm, mostly children— 
he w'as informed by medical students “that it is government policy to 
disperse as widely as possible napalm casualties that are brought to 
hospitals so that visitors will not conclude that there are so many of 
them.” 

American reactions to such discoveries are often astonishing. For 
example, Senator Proxmire inserted into the Congressional Record (May 

284 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


26, 1965, S 11799-801) a whitewash of administration policy by Thomas 
Ross in the Chicago Sun-Times, May 23, 1965, to show how real experts 
support the government. Support the government he does. He also points 
out that “the Vietcong have achieved a high degree of immunity” and 
“move freely throughout most of the country with little fear that the local 
populace will betray them to the government.” Military strategy has 
therefore been forced to shift from counterinsurgency to classical war. 
But, he observes, “it is still much too soon to tell whether sophisticated 
weapons and conventional ground troops can succeed where counter¬ 
insurgency has failed. In fact, there is some evidence of popular resent¬ 
ment to the expanding use of napalm, a development which is not sur¬ 
prising if one has observed a hospital ward full of bleeding women and 
children seared from head to toe.” While Mr. Ross and Senator Proxmire 
may await the evidence, others will draw their own conclusions, even be¬ 
fore the inevitable study by the RAND Corporation. 

56. Excerpts from his secret testimony appear in the New York 
Times, February 2, 1968. The Vietcong will be happy to learn, from 
his testimony, that we do not “seek the surrender of Vietcong forces; 
we would be content to see them lay down their arms and take their 
place as peaceful citizens of South Vietnam, or move to the North if 
they so desire.” Presumably, the distinction between “surrendering” 
and “laying down one’s arms” is explained in the censored part of the 
testimony. 

The remark recalls that of another leading dove, Arthur Goldberg, 
who announced our position before the United Nations, in what was 
widely described as a “conciliatory” statement, as being: “No military 
forces, armed personnel or bases [are] to be maintained in North or 
South Vietnam except those under the control of the respective gov¬ 
ernments” (New York Times, September 22, 1967). The Vietcong, in 
other words, need not surrender; we ask only that it go out of exist¬ 
ence as a military force. And when the government we have instituted 
establishes total military control, we will have no further interest in 
retaining our army in Vietnam. The German High Command could 
have outlined its goals in France in just the same terms. 

57. Lyndon B. Johnson, Congressional Record , March 15, 1948, House, 
p. 2883. 

58. Marcel Niedergang in Le Mofide hebdomadaire, January 18-24, 
1968. The same speech was cited by Hugh O’Shaughnessy in the New 
Statesman, December 1, 1967, who goes on to say that “similar things 

285 - 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


are happening in Nicaragua, which is virtually a U.S. colony and 
where guerrilla warfare broke out this year.” In the Nation, February 
5, 1968, pp. 166-67, Norman Diamond reports on the application in 
Guatemala of “advanced techniques in counterinsurgency being devel¬ 
oped in Vietnam,” including heavy bombing in large areas of the 
country, “pacification,” even rerouting of rivers “to cover the traces of 
