It is useful to bear in mind that the United States government itself 
is on occasion much less diffident in explaining why it refuses to 
contemplate a meaningful negotiated settlement. As is freely admitted, 
this solution would leave it without power to control the situation. See, 
for example, note 37. 

6. Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., A Thousand Days: John F. Kennedy in 
the White House (Boston, Houghton Mifflin Company, 1965), p. 
421. 

7. Walt W. Rostow, The View from the Seventh Floor (New York, 
Harper & Row, Publishers, 1964), p. 149. See also his United States in 
the World Arena (New York, Harper & Row, Publishers, 1960), p. 
244: “Stalin, exploiting the disruption and weakness of the postwar 
world, pressed out from the expanded base he had won during the 
Second World War in an effort to gain the balance of power in 
Eurasia . . . turning to the East, to back Mao and to enflame the 
North Korean and Indochinese Communists. . . .” 

8. For example, the article by CIA analyst George Carver, “The Face¬ 
less Viet Cong,” in Foreign Affairs, Vol. 44 (April 1966), pp. 347-72. 
See also note 33. 

360 


The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


9. Cf. Jean Lacouture, Vietmm: Between Two Truces (New York, 
Random House, 1966), p. 21. Diem’s analysis of the situation was 
shared by Western observers at the time. See, for example, the com¬ 
ments of William Henderson, Far Eastern specialist and executive, 
Council on Foreign Relations, in Richard W. Lindholm, ed., Vietnam: 
The First Five Years (East Lansing, Michigan State University Press, 
1959). He notes “the growing alienation of the intelligentsia,” “the 
renewal of armed dissidence in the South,” the fact that “security has 
noticeably deteriorated in the last two years,” all as a result of Diem’s 
“grim dictatorship,” and predicts “a steady worsening of the political 
climate in free Vietnam, culminating in unforeseen disasters.” 

10. See Bernard Fall, “Vietnam in the Balance,” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 
45 (October 1966), pp. 1-18. 

11. Stalin was pleased neither by the Titoist tendencies inside the 
Greek Communist party nor by the possibility that a Balkan federa¬ 
tion might develop under Titoist leadership. It is nevertheless con¬ 
ceivable that Stalin supported the Greek guerrillas at some stage of the 
rebellion, in spite of the difficulty in obtaining firm documentary evi¬ 
dence. Needless to say, no elaborate study is necessary to document 
