yond imagination. I was told many times while I was on my in¬ 
spection tours of the front, “I cannot go on with this kind of 
wretched work. I will quit and go home.” These words, uttered 
[as we sat] around a lamp sipping kaoliang gin, sounded as though 
someone was spitting blood. In each case we had to console and 
keep telling each other that this was the last hill that needed to be 
conquered. The program was forced through mercilessly, inhu¬ 
manely, without emotion—as if driving a horse. As a result, more 
than 100 defense hamlets were constructed throughout the pre¬ 
fecture. These were built with blood, tears, and sweat. 84 

In Manchuria, the problem of the terrorists and Communist 
bandits seems to have been solved by 1940. In China itself, 
pacification continued throughout the Pacific war. Chalmers 
Johnson summarizes these efforts briefly in a recent study. 85 In 

201 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


both north and central China “the Japanese suffered from guer¬ 
rilla attacks and from their inability to distinguish a guerrilla 
from a villager.” In the north the policy implemented was “the 
physical destruction of all life and property in an area where 
guerrillas were thought to exist . . . whereas in central China a 
policy of establishing so-called Model Peace Zones was pursued 
. . . [consisting] of expelling the Communists from certain very 
rich agricultural areas and then, following this military phase, 
of integrating the cleared area into the Japanese satellite econ¬ 
omy.” The latter policy was far more successful, and it was 
possible to place the government in Chinese hands. There was 
also a “strategic hamlet” program, described in the following 
terms in a recent Japanese commentary: 

. . . the Japanese Army tried its “Chinghsiang” (Clean Hamlet) 
operations in Soochow in Central China and its “Ailutsun” 
(Railway Defense Village) program in Shangtung Province in 
North China. . . . The concept of “Chinghsiang” lies in making 
the village or hamlet the basis for reforming government at the 
grass-root level; and, by concentrating all military, political, eco¬ 
nomic and ideological effort on a single village, in building it up 
into a peaceful, stabilized and secure area; then by using this 
village as a model district, in gradually extending security and 
stability to cover the whole “hsien” (county), the whole province 
and eventually the whole country. 86 

However, external interference made it impossible to carry 
through this program. With far greater power to enforce their 
