peasants without enthusiasm, who would sabotage it until it failed. Vol¬ 
untary collectivization may seem the longer course, but the example of 
the small, well-managed collective will attract the entire peasantry, 
who are profoundly realistic and practical, whereas forced collectiviza¬ 
tion would end by discrediting socialized agriculture” (cited by Bolloten 
op. cit., p. 59). However, there seems no doubt that the precepts of 
the anarchist and left-socialist spokesmen were often violated in prac¬ 
tice. 

92. Borkenau, The Spanish Cockpit, pp. 219-20. Of this officer, Jack- 
son says only that he was “a dependable professional officer.” After 
the fall of Malaga, Lieutenant Colonel Villalba was tried for treason, 
for having deserted the headquarters and abandoned his troops. Broue 
and Temime remark that it is difficult to determine what justice there 
was in the charge. 

93. Jesus Hernandez and Juan Comorera, Spain Organises for Vic¬ 
tory: The Policy of the Communist Party of Spam Explained (Lon¬ 
don, Communist Party of Great Britain, n.d.), cited by Richards, op. 
cit., pp. 99-100. There was no accusation that the phone service was 
restricted, but only that the revolutionary workers could maintain “a 
close check on the conversations that took place between the politi¬ 
cians.” As Richards further observes, “It is, of course, a quite different 
matter when the ‘indiscreet ear’ is that of the O.G.P.U.” 

94. Broue and Temime, op. cit., p. 266. 

95. Jackson, op. cit., p. 370. Thomas suggests that Sese was probably 
killed accidentally ( The Spanish Civil War, p. 428). 

96. The anarchist mayor of the border town of Puigcerda had been 
assassinated in April, after Negrin’s carabineros had taken over the 
border posts. That same day a prominent UGT member, Roldan Cor- 
tada, was murdered in Barcelona, it is presumed by CNT militants. 
This presumption is disputed by Peirats ( Los Anarquistas: see note 
58), who argues, with some evidence, that the murder may have been 
a Stalinist provocation. In reprisal, a CNT man was killed. Orwell, 
whose eyewitness account of the May Days is unforgettable, points 
out that “One can gauge the attitude of the foreign capitalist Press 
towards the Communist-Anarchist feud by the fact that Roldan's 
murder was given wide publicity, while the answering murder was 
carefully unmentioned” (op. cit., p. 119). Similarly, one can gauge 
Jackson’s attitude towards this struggle by his citation of Sese’s murder 
as a critical event, while the murder of Berneri goes unmentioned (cf. 

147 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


notes 64 and 95). Orwell remarks elsewhere that “In the English 
press, in particular, you would have to search for a long time before 
finding any favourable reference, at any period of the war, to the 
Spanish Anarchists. They have been systematically denigrated, and, as 
I know by my own experience, it is almost impossible to get anyone to 
print anything in their defence” (p. 159). Little has changed since. 

97. According to Orwell ( op . cit., pp. 153-54), “A British cruiser and 
two British destroyers had closed in upon the harbour, and no doubt 
there were other warships not far away. The English newspapers gave 
it out that these ships were proceeding to Barcelona ‘to protect British 
interests/ but in fact they made no move to do so; that is, they did not 
land any men or take off any refugees. There can be no certainty 
about this, but it was at least inherently likely that the British Gov¬ 
ernment, which had not raised a finger to save the Spanish Govern¬ 
ment from Franco, would intervene quickly enough to save it from its 
own working class.” This assumption may well have influenced the left- 
wing leadership to restrain the Barcelona workers from simply taking 
control of the whole city, as apparently they could easily have done in 
the initial stages of the May Days. 

Hugh Thomas comments (The Spanish Civil War , p. 428) that 
there was “no reason” for Orwell’s “apprehension” on this matter. In 
the light of the British record with regard to Spain, it seems to me that 
Thomas is simply unrealistic, as compared with Orwell, in this re¬ 
spect. 

98. Orwell, op. cit., pp. 143—44. 

99. Controversy, August 1937, cited by Morrow, p. 173. The predic¬ 
tion was incorrect, though not unreasonable. Had the Western powers 
and the Soviet Union wished, compromise would have been possible, it 
appears, and Spain might have been saved the terrible consequences of 
a Franco victory. See Brenan, op. cit., p. 331. He attributes the British 
failure to support an armistice and possible reconciliation to the fact 
that Chamberlain “saw nothing disturbing in the prospect of an Italian 
and German victory.” It would be interesting to explore more fully the 
attitude of Winston Churchill. In April 1937 he stated that a Franco 
victory would not harm British interests. Rather, the danger was a 
“success of the trotskyists and anarchists” (cited by Broue and Te- 
mime, op. cit., p. 172). Of some interest, in this connection, is the 
recent discovery of an unpublished Churchill essay written in March 
1939 —six months after Munich—in which he said that England 


148 



