benevolence, with its various corollaries (“the politics of inad¬ 
vertence,” “the inscrutability of history”), is a major factor that 
stands in the way of the realistic and common-sense proposal 
that Zinn advocates. 

* Zinn’s discussion of the Munich analogy could also be use¬ 
fully extended by a consideration of the views of the Kennedy 


260 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


liberals. Goodwin, for example, is too sophisticated to accept 
the Munich analogy, but he goes on to offer a revealing coun¬ 
terthesis. He argues, first of all, that in Vietnam we are combat¬ 
ting not aggression but “internal aggression”—an interesting 
phrase, which refers apparently to “aggression” by a revolution¬ 
ary movement against a government maintained in power by 
foreign arms. And he concludes that what we face is not 
Munich but rather “another episode ... in a long, continuing 
conflict.” Other episodes include our “success” in Greece and 
Turkey, Soviet intervention in Cuba, the invasion of Korea, the 
bombing of Quemoy and Matsu, subversion in the Congo and 
the Central African Republic, fighting in Malaya and the Phil¬ 
ippines and on the Indian border. And now, he adds, “they are 
beginning in Thailand.” 

But with whom are we engaged in this “long, continuing 
conflict”? Certainly not the Soviet Union, which had little to do 
with the Sino-Indian border dispute; nor China, which did not 
start the civil war in Greece; nor Ho Chi Minh, who, for all his 
sins, is not responsible for subversion in the Congo. Nor is 
“international Communism” a very convincing devil, in the 
wake of the Sino-Soviet split, gestures of independence in East¬ 
ern Europe and North Korea, the admitted refusal of North 
Vietnam, even in its present desperate straits, to kowtow to its 
powerful allies. In fact, there is no identifiable adversary. We 
are confronted with a mysterious but dangerous force, which 
cannot be located or specified in any concrete terms, but which 
is there, threatening us. While rejecting the Munich analogy, 
Goodwin, the liberal critic, tacitly accepts the assumption on 
which it is based and which gives it great plausibility. For if 
this force exists, then surely we must stop it in Vietnam before 
it lands on the beaches of Florida or Cape Cod. 

The unpleasant fact is that if one wishes to pursue the 


261 


- AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

Munich analogy there is only one plausible contender for the 
role of Hitler. And if China or Russia do involve themselves in 
World War III over Vietnam, we can be sure that the memory 
of Munich will play an important role in their calculations. 72 
Arnold Toynbee has put the matter quite succinctly: “The Pres¬ 
ident manifestly feels that he is speaking with Churchill’s voice 
—the Churchill of 1940—but to the ears of peoples who have 
suffered from Western domination in the past, his voice sounds 
like the Kaiser’s and like Hitler’s.” 

There is surely no greater irony than the demand that to 
ensure world peace, the United States must develop a strategy 
for the containment of China. China is surrounded by American 
missiles and huge military bases supporting an army eight thou¬ 
sand miles from home. It is subject to regular bombardment 
from an island that is barely off the mainland, not to speak of 
overflights and commando raids, all under the protection of the 
Seventh Fleet, admittedly intervening in a civil war. For two 
years American planes have been bombing the only railroad 
connecting southwestern China, with its industrial center of 
Kunming, to the rest of the country—it happens to pass near 
Hanoi. Yet even a Roger Hilsman, one of the sanest voices 
commenting on Asian affairs, can speak of the “formidable 
threat” posed by Communist China, and can conclude that “it 
certainly served no useful purpose for the United States to re¬ 
ward aggression by recognizing Communist China or by encour¬ 
aging their being seated in the U.N.” 73 

It is illuminating to examine in detail Hilsman’s demonstra¬ 
tion of “Chinese belligerence.” The primary example of “Chi¬ 
nese aggression” (apart from “aggression” in Korea) is the sup¬ 
port for the “crude and unsophisticated” insurrections in 
“Burma, Thailand, Malaya, the Philippines, and French Indo¬ 
china,” which the Chinese succeeded in putting “on a more 


262 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


effective, politically sophisticated course” (p. 285). The history 
of “Chinese belligerence,” of the aggression which we must be 
