Through the simple process of starvation, a land without green 
foliage will quickly become a land without insects, without birds, with¬ 
out animal life of any form. News photographs and on-the-spot 
descriptions indicate that some areas have been sprayed repeatedly to 
320 




Some Thoughts on Intellectuals and the Schools 


assure a complete kill of the vegetation. There can be no doubt that the 
DOD is, in the short run, going beyond mere genocide to biocide. It 
commandeered the entire U.S. production of 2,4,5-T for 1967 and 1968 
[some 13 to 14 million pounds (6.36 million kilos) according to U.S. 
Tariff Commission reports]. If one combines this with the other 
chemicals the DOD concedes it is using, there is a sufficient amount 
to kill 97 percent of the aboveground vegetation on over 10 million 
acres of land (about 4 million hectares)—an area so big that it would 
require over 60 years for a man to walk on each acre. 

The long-term effects of spraying such an area may be imponderable, 
but the short-term effects of using these chemicals are certain: a lot 
of leaves, trees, rice plants, and other vegetation are dead or dying; 
and a lot of insects, birds, animals, and a few humans have either 
migrated or died of starvation. The North Vietnamese are fortunate— 
they have only bombs to contend with. 


321 



THE RESPONSIBILITY OF 
INTELLECTUALS 


Twenty years ago, Dwight Macdonald published a series of 
articles in Politics on the responsibilities of peoples, and specifi¬ 
cally, the responsibility of intellectuals. I read them as an un¬ 
dergraduate, in the years just after the war, and had occasion to 
read them again a few months ago. They seem to me to have 
lost none of their power or persuasiveness. Macdonald is con¬ 
cerned with the question of war guilt. He asks the question: To 
what extent were the German or Japanese people responsible 
for the atrocities committed by their governments? And, quite 
properly, he turns the question back to us: To what extent are 
the British or American people responsible for the vicious terror 
bombings of civilians, perfected as a technique of warfare by 
