for our eventual destruction, and that the destruction of that 
force before it can be launched or employed is defensive action 
and not aggression. As a nation we must understand that an overt 
act of war has been committed long before the delivery of that 
first blow. 76 

One wonders how long it will be before the American Air Force 
undertakes defensive action against such overt acts of war on 
the part of the Chinese. 

It would be wrong to leave this matter of American “con¬ 
tainment” of China without reference to a few simple facts that 


266 




The Logic of Withdrawal 


rarely seem to penetrate the American consciousness. There is 
something peculiarly ugly about the American reaction to the 
attempt of China to achieve national unity, to raise itself from 
penury and starvation, to erase a century of degradation. K. S. 
Karol 77 puts the matter plainly, in words that Americans would 
do well to ponder: 

... by trying to strangle China, which has been permanently on 
the edge of famine, and by threatening her with bombs, America 
has helped to “harden” the Chinese and make them what they are 
today. . . . The American anti-Chinese propaganda . . . boomerangs 
on occasion. Pharisaic editorial writers like Joseph Alsop and 
others periodically announce with contemptible pleasure Chinese 
famines which exist, fortunately, only in their imaginations; but 
their editorials are often read in countries with pro-American 
governments where famine actually rages. Sooner or later truth 
will out, and it is then doubly unfavorable to the Americans, first 
because it is disgusting to see the world’s most overfed country 
rejoicing that others—even if they are Communist—are suffering 
from hunger, and secondly because one discovers that it is not in 
China but in their own camp—in Central or South America, for 
example—that people are dying of malnutrition . . . today a 
Kwangtung peasant eats much better than a peasant in Kerala in 
India—and this is known in Asia. 78 

While sympathizing with China’s problems, one may still 
react with dismay, perhaps even outrage, to the authoritarian 
and repressive character of the Chinese state, as one may have 
