

sleek police in the rear and the ragged soldiers in the line.” 98 
(See pages 104-5 below.) 

The contrast reveals a good deal about the nature of the war, 
as it was understood by the Valencia government. Later, Orwell 
was to make this conclusion explicit: “A government which 
sends boys of fifteen to the front with rifles forty years old and 
keeps its biggest men and newest weapons in the rear is mani¬ 
festly more afraid of the revolution than of the fascists. Hence 
the feeble war policy of the past six months, and hence the 
compromise with which the war will almost certainly end.” 99 
Jackson’s account of these events, with its omissions and assump¬ 
tions, suggests that he perhaps shares the view that the greatest 
danger in Spain would have been a victory of the revolution. 

Jackson apparently discounts Orwell’s testimony, to some ex¬ 
tent, commenting that “the readers should bear in mind Or¬ 
well’s own honest statement that he knew very little about the 
political complexities of the struggle.” This is a strange com¬ 
ment. For one thing, Orwell’s analysis of the “political complex¬ 
ities of the struggle” bears up rather well after thirty years; if it 
is defective, it is probably in his tendency to give too much 
prominence to the POUM in comparison with the anarchists— 
not surprising, in view of the fact that he was with the POUM 
militia. His exposure of the fatuous nonsense that was appear¬ 
ing at the time in the Stalinist and liberal presses appears quite 
accurate, and later discoveries have given little reason to chal¬ 
lenge the basic facts that he reported or the interpretation that 
he proposed in the heat of the conflict. Orwell does, in fact, refer 
to his own “political ignorance.” Commenting on the final de¬ 
feat of the revolution in May, he states: “I realized—though 
owing to my political ignorance, not so clearly as I ought to have 
done—that when the Government felt more sure of itself there 
would be reprisals.” But this form of “political ignorance” has 


102 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


simply been compounded in more recent historical work. 

Shortly after the May Days, the Caballero government fell 
and Juan Negrin became premier of Republican Spain. Negrin 
is described as follows, by Broue and Temime: “. . . he is an 
unconditional defender of capitalist property and resolute ad¬ 
versary of collectivization, whom the CNT ministers find block¬ 
ing all of their proposals. He is the one who solidly reorganized 
the carabineros and presided over the transfer of the gold re¬ 
serves of the Republic to the USSR. He enjoyed the confidence 
of the moderates . . . [and] was on excellent terms with the 
Communists.” 

The first major act of the Negrin government was the sup¬ 
pression of the POUM and the consolidation of central control 
over Catalonia. The government next turned to Aragon, which 
had been under largely anarchist control since the first days of 
the revolution, and where agricultural collectivization was quite 
extensive and Communist elements very weak. The municipal 
councils of Aragon were coordinated by the Council of 
Aragon, headed by Joaquin Ascaso, a well-known CNT mili¬ 
tant, one of whose brothers had been killed during the May 
Days. Under the Caballero government, the anarchists had 
agreed to give representation to other antifascist parties, includ¬ 
ing the Communists, but the majority remained anarchist. In 
August the Negrin government announced the dissolution of 
the Council of Aragon and dispatched a division of the Spanish 
army, commanded by the Communist officer Enrique Lister, to 
enforce the dissolution of the local committees, dismantle the 
collectives, and establish central government control. Ascaso 
was arrested on the charge of having been responsible for the 
robbery of jewelry—namely, the jewelry “robbed” by the 
Council for its own use in the fall of 1936. The local anarchist 
press was suppressed in favor of a Communist journal, and in 


103 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


general local anarchist centers were forcefully occupied and 
closed. The last anarchist stronghold was captured, with tanks 
and artillery, on September 21. Because of government-imposed 
censorship, there is very little of a direct record of these events, 
and the major histories pass over them quickly. 100 According to 
Morrow, “the official CNT press . . . compared the assault on 
Aragon with the subjection of Asturias by Lopez Ochoa in Oc¬ 
tober 1934”—the latter, one of the bloodiest acts of repression 
in modern Spanish history. Although this is an exaggeration, it 
is a fact that the popular organs of administration were wiped 
out by Lister’s legions, and the revolution was now over, so far 
as Aragon was concerned. 
