
French bankers, who were generally pro-Franco, blocked the 
release of Spanish gold to the loyalist government, thus hinder¬ 
ing the purchase of arms and, incidentally, increasing the reli¬ 
ance of the Republic on the Soviet Union. 125 The policy of 
“nonintervention,” which effectively blocked Western aid for 
the loyalist government while Hitler and Mussolini in effect 
won the war for Franco, was also technically initiated by the 
French government—though apparently under heavy British 
pressure. 126 

As far as Great Britain is concerned, the hope that it would 
come to the aid of the Republic was always unrealistic. A few 
days after the Franco coup, the foreign editor of Paris-Soir 
wrote: “At least four countries are already taking active interest 
in the battle—France, which is supporting the Madrid Gov¬ 
ernment, and Britain, Germany and Italy, each of which is 
giving discreet but nevertheless effective assistance to one 
group or another among the insurgents.” 127 In fact, British 
support for Franco took a fairly concrete form at the very earli¬ 
est stages of the insurrection. The Spanish navy remained loyal 
to the Republic,* and made some attempt to prevent Franco 
from ferrying troops from Morocco to Spain. Italian and Ger¬ 
man involvement in overcoming these efforts is well docu¬ 
mented; 128 the British role has received less attention, but can 
be determined from contemporary reports. On August 11, 1936, 
the New York Times carried a front-page report on British 
naval actions in the Straits of Gibraltar, commenting that “this 
action helps the Rebels by preventing attacks on Algeciras, 
where troops from Morocco land.” (A few days earlier, loyalist 
warships had bombarded Algeciras, damaging the British con- 

* To be more precise, pro-Franco officers were killed, and the seamen re¬ 
mained loyal to the Republic, in many instances. 

116 




Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


sulate.) An accompanying dispatch from Gibraltar describes 
the situation as it appeared from there: 

Angered by the Spanish factions’ endangering of shipping and 
neutral Gibraltar territory in their fighting, Great Britain virtually 
blockaded Gibraltar Harbor last night with the huge battleship 
Queen Elizabeth in the center of the entrance, constantly playing 
searchlights on near-by waters. 

Many British warships patrolled the entire Strait today, deter¬ 
mined to prevent interference with Britain’s control over the en¬ 
trance to the Mediterranean, a vital place in the British “lifeline 
to the East.” 

This action followed repeated warnings to the Spanish Gov¬ 
ernment and yesterday’s decree that no more fighting would be 
permitted in Gibraltar Harbor. The British at Gibraltar had be¬ 
come increasingly nervous after the shelling of Algeciras by the 
Loyalist battleship Jaime I. 

Although British neutrality is still maintained, the patrol of the 
Strait and the closing of the harbor will aid the military Rebels 
because Loyalist warships cannot attempt to take Algeciras, now 
in Rebel hands, and completely isolate the Rebels from Morocco . 
The Rebels now can release some troops, who were rushed back 
to Algeciras, for duty further north in the drive for Madrid. 

It was reported in Gibraltar tonight that the Rebels had sent a 
transport across the Strait and had landed more troops from 
Morocco for use in the columns that are marching northward 
from headquarters at Seville. 

This was the second time this year that Britain warned a power 
when she believed her measure of Mediterranean control was 
threatened, and it remains to be seen w r hether the Madrid Gov¬ 
ernment will flout the British as the Italians did. If it attempts to 
do so, the British gunners of the Gibraltar fort have authority to 
fire warning shots. What will happen if such shots go unheeded is 
obvious. 

All the British here refer to the Madrid Government as the 
“Communists” and there is no doubt where British sympathies 
now lie, encouraged by the statement of General Francisco 

117 


if - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

Franco, leader of the Rebels, that he is not especially cooperating 
with Italy. 

The British Government has ordered Spaniards here to cease 
plotting or be expelled and has asked Britons “loyally to refrain 
from either acting or speaking publicly in such a manner as to 
display marked partiality or partisanship.” 

