
On Monday, October 16, on the Boston Common I listened as 


368 


On Resistance 


Howard Zinn explained why he felt ashamed to be an Ameri¬ 
can. I watched as several hundred young men, some of them 
my students, made a terrible decision which no young person 
should have to face: to sever their connection with the Selective 
Service System. The week ended, the following Monday, with a 
quiet discussion in Cambridge in which I heard estimates, by an 
academic consultant to the Department of Defense, of the 
nuclear megatonnage that would be necessary to “take out” 
North Vietnam (“Some will find this shocking, but . . “No 
civilian in the government is suggesting this, to my knowledge 
. . “Let’s not use emotional words like ‘destruction’ etc.), 
and listened to a leading expert on Soviet affairs who explained 
how the men in the Kremlin are watching very carefully to 
determine whether wars of national liberation can succeed—if 
so, they will support them all over the world. (Try pointing out 
to such an expert that on these assumptions, if the men in the 
Kremlin are rational, they will surely support dozens of such 
wars right now, since at a small cost they can confound the 
American military and tear our society to shreds—you will be 
told that you don’t understand the Russian soul.) 

The weekend of the peace demonstrations in Washington left 
impressions that are vivid and intense, but unclear to me in 
their implications. The dominant memory is of the scene itself, 
of tens of thousands of young people surrounding what they 
believe to be—I must add that I agree—the most hideous insti¬ 
tution on this earth and demanding that it stop imposing misery 
and destruction. Tens of thousands of young people. This I find 
hard to comprehend. It is pitiful but true that by an over¬ 
whelming margin it is the young who are crying out in horror at 
what we all see happening, the young who are being beaten 
when they stand their ground, and the young who have to 
decide whether to accept jail or exile, or to fight in a hideous 


369 




