nents of the war give to the political and social problems of 
Vietnam. Those who were opposed to the Japanese conquest of 
Manchuria a generation ago did not place emphasis on the 
political and social and economic problems of Manchuria, but 
on those of Japan. They did not engage in farcical debate over 
the exact degree of support for the puppet emperor, but looked 
to the sources of Japanese imperialism. Now opponents of the 
war can much more easily shift attention to the source of the 
aggression, to our own country, its ideology and institutions. 
We can ask whose “interest” is served by 100,000 casualties and 
100 billion dollars expended in the attempt to subjugate a small 
country halfway around the world. We can point to the absur¬ 
dity of the idea that we are “containing China” by destroying 
popular and independent forces on its borders, and to the cyni¬ 
cism of the claim that we are in Vietnam because “to Ameri¬ 
cans, peace and freedom are inseparable” and because “sup¬ 
pression of freedom” must not “go unchallenged” (the Citizens 
Committee again). We can ask why it is that those who make 
this claim do not suggest that an American expeditionary force 
be sent to Taiwan, to Rhodesia, to Greece, or to Mississippi, but 
only to Vietnam, where, they want us to believe, the master 
aggressor Mao Tse-tung is following a Hitlerian course in his 
cunning way, committing aggression without troops and an¬ 
nouncing world conquest by insisting, through the medium of 
Lin Piao, that indigenous wars of national liberation can expect 
little from China beyond applause. We can ask why Secretary 
McNamara reads such statements as a new Mein Kampj —or 
why those who admit that “a Vietnamese communist regime 


37? 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


★= 

would probably be . . . anti-Chinese” (Ithiel de Sola Pool, Asian 
Survey, August 1967) nevertheless sign statements which pre¬ 
tend that in Vietnam we are facing the expansionist aggressors 
from Peking. We can ask what factors in American ideology 
make it so easy for intelligent and well-informed men to say that 
we “insist upon nothing for South Vietnam except that it be free 
to chart its own future” (Citizens Committee) although they 
know quite well that the regime we imposed excluded all those 
who took part in the struggle against French colonialism, “and 
properly so” (Secretary Rusk, 1963) ; that we have since been 
attempting to suppress a “civil insurrection” (General Stillwell) 
led by the only “truly mass-based political party in South Viet¬ 
nam” (Douglas Pike); that we supervised the destruction of the 
Buddhist opposition; that we offered the peasants a “free 
choice” between the Saigon government and the National Lib¬ 
eration Front by herding them into strategic hamlets from 
which NLF cadres and sympathizers were eliminated by the 
police (Roger Hilsman); and so on. The story is familiar. And 
we can emphasize what must be obvious to a person with a 
grain of political intelligence: that the present world problem is 
not “containing China” but containing the United States. 

More important, we can ask the really fundamental question. 
Suppose that it were in the American “national interest” to 
pound into rubble a small nation that refuses to submit to our 
will. Would it then be legitimate and proper for us to act “in 
this national interest”? The Rusks and the Humphreys and the 
Citizens Committee say yes. Nothing could show more clearly 
how we are taking the road of the fascist aggressors of a gen¬ 
eration ago. 

We are, of course, in a domestic political environment very 
different from that of the citizens of Germany or Japan. Here, it 
takes no heroism to protest. We have many avenues open to us 


378 



On Resistance 


to drive home the lesson that there is not one law for the United 
States and one for the rest of mankind, that no one has ap¬ 
pointed us judge and executioner for Vietnam or anywhere else. 
Many avenues of political education, on and off the campus, 
have been explored in the past two years. There can be no ques¬ 
tion that this effort should continue and grow to whatever limit 
the degree of commitment permits. 

Some seem to feel that resistance will “blacken” the peace 
movement and make it difficult to reach potential sympathizers 
through more familiar channels. I don’t agree with this objec¬ 
tion, but I feel that it should not be lightly disregarded. Resis¬ 
ters who hope to save the people of Vietnam from destruction 
must select the issues they confront and the means they employ 
in such a way as to attract as much popular support as possible 
for their efforts. There is no lack of clear issues and honorable 
means, surely, hence no reason why one should be impelled to 
ugly actions on ambiguous issues. In particular, it seems to me 
that draft resistance, properly conducted (as it has been so 
