efforts are viewed in the United States” 34 (when we turn to the 
United States, of course, we are concerned with people whose 
attitudes must be taken into account, not merely their behav¬ 
ior). It will help us overcome one of the main defects in the 
American character, the “emotional reaction” that leads us to 
side with “crusaders for the common man” and against a “ruth¬ 
less, exploitative tyrant” (“that there may be reality as well as 
appearance in this role-casting is not the point”). This senti¬ 
mentality “frequently interferes with a realistic assessment of 
alternatives, and inclines us instead toward a carping right¬ 
eousness in our relations with the beleaguered government we 
are ostensibly supporting”; it may be overcome by concentra¬ 
tion on control of behavior rather than modification of attitudes 
or the winning of hearts and minds. Hence the new approach to 
counterinsurgency should not only be effective in extending the 
control of American-approved governments, but it may also 
have a beneficial effect on us. The possibilities are awe-inspir¬ 
ing. Perhaps in this way we can even escape the confines of our 
“guilt culture in w*hich there is a tradition of belief in equality.” 

It is extremely important, Wolf would claim, that we develop 


56 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


a rational understanding of insurgency, for “insurgency is prob¬ 
ably the most likely type of politico-military threat in the third 
world, and surely one of the most complex and challenging 
problems facing United States policies and programs.” The 
primary objective of American foreign policy in the Third 
World must be “the denial of communist control,” specifically, 
the support of countries that are defending their “independence 
from external and internal communist domination.” The latter 
problem, defending independence from internal Communist 
domination, is the crucial problem, particularly in Latin Amer¬ 
ica. We must counter the threat by a policy of promoting eco¬ 
nomic growth and modernization (making sure, however, to avoid 
the risks inherent in these processes—cf. Mitchell), combined 
with “a responsible use of force.” No question is raised about the 
appropriateness of our use of force in a country threatened by 
insurgency. The justification, were the question raised, is in¬ 
herent in the assumption that we live “in a world in which loss 
of national independence is often synonymous with communist 
control, and communism is implicitly considered to be irrever¬ 
sible.” Thus, by Orwellian logic, we are actually defending na¬ 
tional independence when we intervene with military force to 
