age the highest proof that above all things stands the eternal value of 
religion and of the Spirit.” Of course, the position of the Catholic 
Church has since undergone important shifts—something that cannot 
be said of the American government. 

146. See note 60. 

147. See, for example, the reference to Machajski in Harold D. Lass- 
well, The World Revolution of Our Time: A Framework for Basic 
Policy Research (Hoover Institute Studies; Stanford, Calif., Stanford 
University Press, 1951); reprinted, with extensions, in Harold D. 
Lasswell and Daniel Lerner, eds., World Revolutionary Elites: Studies 
in Coercive Ideological Movements (Cambridge, Mass., The M.I.T. 
Press, 1965), pp. 29-96. Daniel Bell has a more extensive discussion 
of Machajski’s critique of socialism as the ideology of a new system of 
exploitation in which the “intellectual workers” will dominate, in a 
very informative essay that bears directly on a number of the topics 
that have been mentioned here: “Two Roads from Marx: The Themes 
of Alienation and Exploitation, and Workers’ Control in Socialist 
Thought,” in The End of Ideology, pp. 335-68. 

148. Lasswell, op. cit., p. 85. In this respect, Lasswell’s prognosis 
resembles that of Bell in the essays cited earlier. 

149. Summarized in the Christian Science Monitor, March 15, 1968. 
I have not seen the text and therefore cannot judge the accuracy of the 
report. 

150. To mention just the most recent example: on January 22, 1968, 
McNamara testified before the Senate Armed Services Committee that 
“the evidence appears overwhelming that beginning in 1966 Commu¬ 
nist local and guerrilla forces have sustained substantial attrition. As a 
result, there has been a drop in combat efficiency and morale. . . .” 

157 




AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


The Tet offensive was launched within a week of this testimony. See /. 
F. Stone’s Weekly, February 19, 1968, for some highly appropriate 
commentary. 

151. The reality behind the rhetoric has been amply reported. A par¬ 
ticularly revealing description is given by Katsuichi Honda, a reporter 
for Asahi Shimbun, in Vietnam—A Voice from the Villages, 1967, 
obtainable from the Committee for the English Publication of “Viet¬ 
