that we—unilaterally, as in Vietnam—designate as illegitimate 
will face the most efficient and ruthless machinery that can be 
developed by modern technology. 

In minor ways, world opinion can serve as some kind of 
brake on full-scale utilization of the technology of terror and 
destruction. There has, as yet, been no use of nuclear weapons 
in Vietnam; and although rural populations are considered fair 
game for any sort of military attack, urban areas, where the 
butchery would be more evident to the outside world, are still 
relatively immune. Similarly, the use of gas attacks and chemi¬ 
cal warfare has been extended only slowly, as habituation per¬ 
mits each gradual increment to pass unnoticed . 2 But ultimately, 
the only effective brake can be popular revulsion on a mass 


312 


Some Thoughts on Intellectuals and the Schools 


scale in the United States itself. Consequently, the level of cul¬ 
ture that can be achieved in the United States is a life-and- 
death matter for large masses of suffering humanity. This too is 
a fact that must color any discussion of contemporary American 
institutions. 

It is easy to be carried away by the sheer horror of what the 
daily press reveals and to lose sight of the fact that this is 
merely the brutal exterior of a deeper crime, of commitment to 
a social order that guarantees endless suffering and humiliation 
and denial of elementary human rights. It is tragic that the 
United States should have become, in Toynbee’s words, “the 
leader of a world-wide anti-revolutionary movement in defense 
of vested interests.” For American intellectuals and for the 
schools, there is no more vital issue than this indescribable 
tragedy. 

No one would seriously propose that the schools attempt to 
deal directly with such contemporary events as the American 
attack on the rural population of Vietnam or the backgrounds 
in recent history for the atrocities that are detailed in the mass 
media. No sane person would have expected the schools in 
France, for example, to explore the character of and justifica¬ 
tion for the Algerian war, or the schools in Russia to have dealt 
honestly with the crushing of the Hungarian revolution, or the 
schools in Italy to have analyzed the invasion of Ethiopia in an 
objective way, or the schools in England to have exposed the 
contemporary suppression of Irish nationalism. Rut it is perhaps 
not ridiculous to propose that the schools might direct them¬ 
selves to something more abstract, to an attempt to offer stu¬ 
dents some means for defending themselves from the onslaught 
of the massive government propaganda apparatus, from the 
natural bias of the mass media, and—to turn specifically to our 
present topic—from the equally natural tendency of significant 


313 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


segments of the American intellectual community to offer their 
allegiance, not to truth and justice, but to power and the effec¬ 
tive exercise of power. 

It is frightening to observe the comparative indifference of 
American intellectuals to the immediate actions of their govern¬ 
ment and its long-range policies, and their frequent willingness 
—often eagerness—to play a role in implementing these poli¬ 
cies. This is not the place to illustrate in detail; in any event, I 
do not command the rhetoric to speak, in the only accurate and 
appropriate terms, of the actual conduct of the war and the way 
it has been tolerated at home. But more superficial examples 
make the point well enough. 

Only marginal groups of American academics have reacted to 
the fact that while the United States stands in the way of the 
only sort of meaningful negotiations, namely, negotiations 
among indigenous South Vietnamese political forces to the ex¬ 
clusion of the foreign invaders from the United States and 
Korea, and (on a vastly different scale) from North Vietnam, it 
nevertheless is able to persist in its pretense of interest in a 
“negotiated settlement” with no outcry of protest against this 
farce. When Secretary Rusk openly admits that we cannot ac¬ 
cept the North Vietnamese proposals of April 1965 because 
they require that the Saigon government be supplanted by a 
broad, national democratic coalition representing existing polit¬ 
ical forces in the country, there is no public denunciation of the 
cynicism of the position he upholds. When the press reports 
that the electoral law commission in South Vietnam faces the 
“awesome task” of running “honest elections” while making sure 
that the Communists do not win and that no Communists or 
“neutralists whose actions are advantageous to the Commu¬ 
nists” appear on the ballot, there is little editorial comment, few 
letters to the editor, no general dismay. There is little point in 


