
50. Rosa Luxemburg, The Russian Revolution, trans. Bertram D. 
Wolfe (Ann Arbor, University of Michigan Press, 1961), p. 71. 

51. Luxemburg, cited by Guerin, Jeunesse du socialisme libertaire, pp. 
106-7. 

52. Leninism or Marxism, in Luxemburg, op. cit., p. 102. 

53. For a very enlightening study of this matter, emphasizing domes¬ 
tic issues, see Michael Paul Rogin, The Intellectuals and McCarthy: 
The Radical Specter (Cambridge, Mass., the M.I.T. Press, 1967). 

54. The Spanish Republic and the Civil War: 1931-1939 (Princeton, 
N.J., Princeton University Press, 1965). 

55. Respectively, President of the Republic, Prime Minister from May 
until the Franco insurrection, and member of the conservative wing of 
the Popular Front selected by Azana to try to set up a compromise 
government after the insurrection. 

56. It is interesting that Douglas Pike’s very hostile account of the 
National Liberation Front, cited earlier, emphasizes the popular and 
voluntary element in its striking organizational successes. What he de¬ 
scribes, whether accurately or not one cannot tell, is a structure of 
interlocking self-help organizations, loosely coordinated and developed 
through persuasion rather than force—in certain respects, of a charac- 
136 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


ter that would have appealed to anarchist thinkers. Those who speak 
so freely of the “authoritarian Vietcong” may be correct, but they 
have presented little evidence to support their judgment. Of course, it 
must be understood that Pike regards the element of voluntary mass 
participation in self-help associations as the most dangerous and in¬ 
sidious feature of the NLF organizational structure. 

Also relevant is the history of collectivization in China, which, as 
compared with the Soviet Union, shows a much higher reliance on 
persuasion and mutual aid than on force and terror, and appears to 
have been more successful. See Thomas P. Bernstein, “Leadership and 
Mass Mobilisation in the Soviet and Chinese Collectivization Cam¬ 
paigns of 1929-30 and 1955-56: A Comparison/’ China Quarterly, 
No. 31 (July-September 1967), pp. 1-47, for some interesting and 
suggestive comments and analysis. 

The scale of the Chinese Revolution is so great and reports in depth 
