scholarly study and understanding of Vietnam” if our “involve¬ 
ment” is to succeed, and expresses his judgment that the papers 
in this volume “demonstrate that issues and topics closely con¬ 
nected to policy can be presented and analyzed in scholarly and 
objective fashion.” 

Huntington’s own contribution to “scholarly study and under¬ 
standing of Vietnam” includes an article in the Boston Globe, 
February 17, 1968. Here he describes the “momentous changes 
in Vietnamese society during the past five years,” specifically, 
the process of urbanization. This process “struck directly at the 
strength and potential appeal of the Viet Cong.” “So long as the 
overwhelming mass of the people lived in the countryside, the 
VC could win the war by winning control of those people—and 
they came very close to doing so in both 1961 and 1964. But the 
American sponsored urban revolution undercut the VC rural 
revolution.” The refugees fleeing from the rural areas found not 
only security but also “prosperity and economic well-being.” 
“While wartime urban prosperity hurt some, the mass of the 
poor people benefited from it.” 

The sources of urbanization have been described clearly 
many times, for example, by this American spokesman in Viet¬ 
nam: “There have been three choices open to the peasantry. 
One, to stay where they are; two, to move into the areas con¬ 
trolled by us; three, to move off into the interior towards the 
Vietcong. . . . Our operations have been designed to make the 
first choice impossible, the second attractive, and to reduce the 
likelihood of anyone choosing the third to zero.” 24 The benefits 
accruing to the newly urbanized elements have also been amply 
described in the press, for example, by James Doyle of the 


42 



Objectivity and Libera! Scholarship 


Globe, February 22, 1968: Saigon “is a rich city, the bar own¬ 
ers, B-girls, money changers and black marketeers all making 
their fortunes while it lasts. It is a poor city, with hundreds of 
thousands of refugees crammed into thatched huts and tin- 
roofed shacks, more than two million people shoehorned into 21 
square miles.” Or Neil Sheehan, in a classic and often-quoted 
article (New York Times, October 9, 1966): 

A drive through Saigon demonstrates another fashion in which 
the social system works. Virtually all the new construction con¬ 
