tion again reflects Jackson’s antipathy towards the revolution 
and its goals. I will return to this question directly, with refer¬ 
ence to areas where agricultural collectivization was much more 
extensive than in Catalonia. 

The complexities of modern society that baffled and con¬ 
founded the unsuspecting anarchist workers of Barcelona, as 
Jackson enumerates them, were the following: the accumulat¬ 
ing food and supply problems and the administration of frontier 
posts, villages, and public utilities. As just noted, the food and 
supply problems seem to have accumulated most rapidly under 
the brilliant leadership of Juan Comorera. So far as the frontier 
posts are concerned, the situation, as Jackson elsewhere de¬ 
scribes it (p. 368), was basically as follows: “In Catalonia the 
anarchists had, ever since July 18, controlled the customs 
stations at the French border. On April 17, 1937, the reorganized 
carabineros, acting on orders of the Finance Minister, Juan 
Negrin, began to reoccupy the frontier. At least eight an¬ 
archists were killed in clashes with the carabineros.” Apart 
from this difficulty, admittedly serious, there seems little 
reason to suppose that the problem of manning frontier 
posts contributed to the ebbing of the revolutionary tide. 
The available records do not indicate that the problems 
of administering villages or public utilities were either 
“unsuspected” or too complex for the Catalonian work¬ 
ers—a remarkable and unsuspected development, but one 
which nevertheless appears to be borne out by the evidence 
available to us. I want to emphasize again that Jackson presents 
no evidence to support his conclusions about the ebbing of the 


97 


* = AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

revolutionary tide and the reasons for the disaffection of the 
Catalonian workers. Once again, I think it fair to attribute his 
conclusions to the elitist bias of the liberal intellectual rather 
than to the historical record. 

Consider next Jackson’s comment that the anarchists “ex¬ 
plained the loss of Malaga as due in large measure to the low 
morale and the disorientation of the Andalusian proletariat, 
which saw the Valencia government evolving steadily toward 
the right.” Again, it seems that Jackson regards this as just 
another indication of the naivete and unreasonableness of the 
Spanish anarchists. However, here again there is more to the 
story. One of the primary sources that Jackson cites is Bor- 
kenau, quite naturally, since Borkenau spent several days in the 
area just prior to the fall of Malaga on February 8, 1937. But 
Borkenau’s detailed observations tend to bear out the anarchist 
“explanation,” at least in part. He believed that Malaga might 
have been saved, but only by a “fight of despair” with mass 
involvement, of a sort that “the anarchists might have led.” But 
two factors prevented such a defense: first, the officer assigned 
to lead the defense, Lieutenant Colonel Villalba, “interpreted 
this task as a purely military one, whereas in reality he had no 
military means at his disposal but only the forces of a popular 
movement”; he was a professional officer, “who in the secrecy of 
his heart hated the spirit of the militia” and was incapable of 
comprehending the “political factor.” 92 A second factor was the 
significant decline, by February, of political consciousness and 
mass involvement. The anarchist committees were no longer 
functioning and the authority of the police and Civil Guards 
had been restored. “The nuisance of hundreds of independent 
village police bodies had disappeared, but with it the passionate 
interest of the village in the civil war. . . . The short interlude of 
the Spanish Soviet system was at an end” (p. 212). After re- 


98 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


viewing the local situation in Malaga and the conflicts in the 
Valencia government (which failed to provide support or arms 
for the militia defending Malaga), Borkenau concludes (p. 
228): “The Spanish republic paid with the fall of Malaga for 
the decision of the Right wing of its camp to make an end of 
social revolution and of its Left wing not to allow that. 5 ’ Jack¬ 
son’s discussion of the fall of Malaga refers to the terror and 
political rivalries within the town but makes no reference to the 
fact that Borkenau’s description, and the accompanying inter¬ 
pretation, do support the belief that the defeat was due in large 
measure to low morale and to the incapacity, or unwillingness, 
of the Valencia government to fight a popular war. On the 
contrary, he concludes that Colonel Villalba’s lack of means for 
“controlling the bitter political rivalries” was one factor that 
prevented him from carrying out the essential military tasks. 
Thus he seems to adopt the view that Borkenau condemns, that 
the task was a “purely military one.” Borkenau’s eyewitness 
account appears to me much more convincing. 

In this case too Jackson has described the situation in a 
somewhat misleading fashion, perhaps again because of the 
elitist bias that dominates the liberal-Communist interpretation 
of the Civil War. Like Lieutenant Colonel Villalba, liberal his¬ 
