
241 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


* 

territorial integrity” for all of Vietnam. Apparently, the United 
States had no intention of fulfilling its Geneva commitment, a 
fact that is admitted with remarkable frankness. For example, 
the Honorable Kenneth T. Young, Director of Southeast Asian 
Affairs in the State Department from 1954 to 1958, writes that 
in 1954 “our aim was an independent South Vietnam with a 
strong government responsive to the nationalist aspirations of 
the population.” 44 Thus our aim was to violate our commitment 
at Geneva. This aim was part of our general program of “trying 
to safeguard South Vietnam as part of the ‘retainment’ of all or 
most of non-communist Asia,” “of helping the Vietnamese to 
create stability, security and prosperity south of the 17th paral¬ 
lel” so as “to deter aggression and subversion from the North”— 
all in violation of our commitment at Geneva to a unified Viet¬ 
nam, with supervised elections in 1956. Obviously one could 
hardly have supposed that “North Vietnam,” prior to the 
scheduled elections in 1956, would carry out “aggression and 
subversion,” and as events were to prove, nothing occurred in 
those years that could even remotely be construed in such 
terms, despite the Diemist repression and Diem's refusal (with 
our support) to undertake the 1955 consultations that were 
provided for by the Geneva accords. 

Secretary Dulles, it will be recalled, went still further in his 
aims, as when he advised the French ambassador, prior to the 
conference, that “above all, the deltas of the Red and Mekong 
rivers must be retained as bases from which a counterattack 
could recover what was lost to the Viet Minh at the conference 
table.” 45 It would be interesting, though probably impossible, 
to trace the ways in which the United States and its Saigon ally 
acted on this concept. Bernard Fall claims, on what evidence he 
does not say, that “constantly since 1956” small saboteur groups 
have been parachuted or infiltrated into North Vietnam, though 


242 




The Logic of Withdrawal 


“the casualty rate is very high and successes, if any, are few and 
far between.” 40 Richard Goodwin dates these attempts from 
1958. 47 Recall that even according to American propaganda, 
“There was no serious threat [in South Vietnam] until 1959-60, 
when North Vietnam set in motion a systematic effort to seize 
control of South Vietnam by force.” 48 In fact, the American 
government claims only that infiltration of trained South Viet¬ 
namese cadres began in 1959; even just prior to the American 
takeover of the war in early 1965, surveys of Vietcong prisoners 
and defectors found “most native South Vietnamese guerrillas 
unaware of any North Vietnamese role in the war, except as a 
valued ally.” 49 A comparative study of the success of the South 
Vietnamese commandos in North Vietnam and the Northern- 
trained South Vietnamese cadres sent to South Vietnam in the 
1960s might provide an interesting commentary on some of the 
strange ideas about “revolutionary guerrilla war” that appear in 
current American propaganda. 

It is curious, incidentally, that today only the United States 
and the “.Communists” insist that South Vietnam is a separate 
and independent entity. The Saigon authorities maintain, in 
article 1 of the new constitution, that “Vietnam [not South 
Vietnam] is a territorially indivisible, unified, and independent 
republic,” of which they claim to be the rulers; article 107 of the 
constitution specifies that article 1 cannot be amended. Hence 
in their view, even if Ho Chi Minh were to have sent his entire 
army to South Vietnam, he would not have been guilty of “ag¬ 
gression,” but only of insurrection and subversion. 

There is, however, a much more dangerous development than 
the falsification and cynicism of the American government with 
respect to its international commitments and to domestic and 
international law, namely, the tolerance by even enlightened 
American opinion of the notion that we have a perfect right to 


243 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


intervene in the internal affairs of Vietnam, to determine the 
“legitimate” elements in South Vietnamese society, and to direct 
the development of social and political institutions of our choice 
in that unfortunate country. It is shameful but undeniable that 
the turmoil over the war in the United States would never have 
risen beyond a whisper had we met with success in our attempt 
