Coffin, Mitchell Goodman, and Michael Ferber to two-year prison sentences for 
“conspiracy.” For details, see Noam Chomsky, Paul Lauter, and Florence 
Howe, “Reflections on a Political Trial,” New York Review of Books, August 
22, 1968, pp. 23-30. The Pentagon demonstration, which by some estimates in¬ 
volved several hundred thousand people, was a remarkable, unforgettable 
manifestation of opposition to the war. The spirit and character of the demon¬ 
strations are captured, with marvelous accuracy and perception, in Norman 
Mailer’s The Armies of the Night (New York, New American Library, 1968). 

367 







*— AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

For many of the participants, the Washington demonstrations 
symbolized the transition “from dissent to resistance.” I will 
return to this slogan and its meaning, but I want to make clear 
at the outset that I do feel it to be not only accurate with 
respect to the mood of the demonstrations but, properly inter¬ 
preted, appropriate to the present state of protest against the 
war. There is an irresistible dynamics to such protest. One may 
begin by writing articles and giving speeches about the war, by 
helping in many ways to create an atmosphere of concern and 
outrage. A courageous few will turn to direct action, refusing to 
take their place alongside the “good Germans” we have all 
learned to despise. Some will be forced to this decision when 
they are called up for military service. The dissenting senators, 
writers, and professors will watch as young men refuse to serve 
in the armed forces, in a war that they detest. What then ? Can 
those who write and speak against the war take refuge in the 
fact that they have not urged or encouraged draft resistance, 
but have merely helped to develop a climate of opinion in 
which any decent person will want to refuse to take part in a 
miserable war ? It is a very thin line. Nor is it very easy to watch 
from a position of safety while others are forced to take a grim 
and painful step. The fact is that most of the one thousand draft 
cards and other documents turned in to the Justice Department 
on October 20 came from men who can escape military service 
but who insisted on sharing the fate of those who are less privi¬ 
leged. In such ways the circle of resistance widens. Quite apart 
from this, no one can fail to see that to the extent that he restricts 
his protest, to the extent that he rejects actions that are open to 
him, he accepts complicity in what the government does. Some 
will act on this realization, posing sharply a moral issue that no 
person of conscience can evade. 

On Monday, October 16, on the Boston Common I listened as 


368 


On Resistance 


Howard Zinn explained why he felt ashamed to be an Ameri¬ 
can. I watched as several hundred young men, some of them 
my students, made a terrible decision which no young person 
should have to face: to sever their connection with the Selective 
Service System. The week ended, the following Monday, with a 
quiet discussion in Cambridge in which I heard estimates, by an 
academic consultant to the Department of Defense, of the 
nuclear megatonnage that would be necessary to “take out” 
North Vietnam (“Some will find this shocking, but . . “No 
civilian in the government is suggesting this, to my knowledge 
. . “Let’s not use emotional words like ‘destruction’ etc.), 
and listened to a leading expert on Soviet affairs who explained 
how the men in the Kremlin are watching very carefully to 
determine whether wars of national liberation can succeed—if 
so, they will support them all over the world. (Try pointing out 
to such an expert that on these assumptions, if the men in the 
Kremlin are rational, they will surely support dozens of such 
wars right now, since at a small cost they can confound the 
American military and tear our society to shreds—you will be 
told that you don’t understand the Russian soul.) 

The weekend of the peace demonstrations in Washington left 
impressions that are vivid and intense, but unclear to me in 
their implications. The dominant memory is of the scene itself, 
of tens of thousands of young people surrounding what they 
believe to be—I must add that I agree—the most hideous insti¬ 
tution on this earth and demanding that it stop imposing misery 
and destruction. Tens of thousands of young people. This I find 
hard to comprehend. It is pitiful but true that by an over¬ 
whelming margin it is the young who are crying out in horror at 
what we all see happening, the young who are being beaten 
when they stand their ground, and the young who have to 
decide whether to accept jail or exile, or to fight in a hideous 


369 




