According to Broue and Temime, it was the restriction of 
credit that finally destroyed collectivized industry. The Com- 
panys government in Catalonia refused to create a bank for 
industry and credit, as demanded by the CNT and POUM, and 
the central government (relying, in this case, on control of the 
banks by the socialist UGT) was able to control the flow of 
capital and “to reserve credit for private enterprise.” All at¬ 
tempts to obtain credit for collectivized industry were unsuc¬ 
cessful, they maintain, and “the movement of collectivization 
was restricted, then halted, the government remaining in con¬ 
trol of industry through the medium of the banks . . . [and 
later] through its control of the choice of managers and direc¬ 
tors,” who often turned out to be the former owners and man¬ 
agers, under new titles. The situation was similar in the case of 
collectivized agriculture (pp. 204 f.). 

The situation was duly recognized in the West. The New 
York Times, in February 1938, observed: “The principle of 


91 


★= 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


State intervention and control of business and industry, as 
against workers’ control of them in the guise of collectivization, 
is gradually being established in loyalist Spain by a series of 
decrees now appearing. Coincidentally there is to be estab¬ 
lished the principle of private ownership and the rights of cor¬ 
porations and companies to what is lawfully theirs under the 
Constitution.” 84 

Morrow cites (pp. 64-65) a series of acts by the Catalonian 
government restricting collectivization, once power had shifted 
away from the new institutions set up by the workers’ revolu¬ 
tion of July 1936. On February 3, the collectivization of the 
dairy trade was declared illegal. 85 In April, “the Generalidad 
annulled workers’ control over the customs by refusing to cer¬ 
tify workers’ ownership of material that had been exported and 
was being tied up in foreign courts by suits of former owners; 
henceforth the factories and agricultural collectives exporting 
goods were at the mercy of the government.” In May, as has 
already been noted, the collectivization decree of October 24 
was rescinded, with the argument that the decree “was dictated 
without competency by the Generalidad,” because “there was 
