
refute each falsehood as it appears. But the power of the gov¬ 
ernment propaganda apparatus is such that the citizen who 
does not undertake a research project on the subject can hardly 
hope to confront government pronouncements with fact. 1 

The deceit and distortion surrounding the American invasion 
of Vietnam are by now so familiar that they have lost their 
power to shock. It is therefore well to recall that although new 
levels of cynicism are constantly being reached, their clear 
antecedents w r ere accepted at home with quiet toleration. It is a 
useful exercise to compare government statements at the time 
of the invasion of Guatemala in 1954 with Eisenhower’s admis¬ 
sion—to be more accurate, his boast—a decade later that Amer¬ 
ican planes were sent “to help the invaders.” 2 Nor is it only in 
moments of crisis that duplicity is considered perfectly in order. 
“New Frontiersmen,” for example, have scarcely distinguished 
themselves by a passionate concern for historical accuracy, even 
when they are not being called upon to provide a “propaganda 
cover” for ongoing actions. For example, Arthur Schlesinger 
describes the bombing of North Vietnam and the massive esca¬ 
lation of military commitment in early 1965 as based on a “per¬ 
fectly rational argument”: “. . . so long as the Vietcong thought 
they were going to win the war, they obviously would not be 
interested in any kind of negotiated settlement.” 3 The date is 
important. Had the statement been made six months earlier, 
one could attribute it to ignorance. But this statement appeared 
after months of front-page news reports detailing the United 
Nations, North Vietnamese, and Soviet initiatives that preceded 
the February 1965 escalation and that, in fact, continued for 
several weeks after the bombing began, after months of soul- 
searching by Washington correspondents who were trying des¬ 
perately to find some mitigating circumstances for the startling 
deception that had been revealed. (Chalmers Roberts, for 


326 


The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


example, wrote with unconscious irony that late February 1965 
“hardly seemed to Washington to be a propitious moment for 
negotiations [since] Mr. Johnson . . . had just ordered the first 
bombing of North Vietnam in an effort to bring Hanoi to a 
conference table where bargaining chips on both sides would 
be more closely matched/ 54 ) Coming at this moment, Schles- 
inger’s statement is less an example of deceit than of contempt 
—contempt for an audience that can be expected to tolerate 
such behavior wdth silence, if not approval. 5 

To turn to someone closer to the actual formation and im¬ 
plementation of policy, consider some of the reflections of Walt 
Rostow, a man who, according to Schlesinger, brought a “spa¬ 
cious historical view 55 to the conduct of foreign affairs in the 
Kennedy administration. 6 According to his analysis, the guer¬ 
rilla warfare in Indochina in 1946 was launched by Stalin, 7 and 
Hanoi initiated the guerrilla war against South Vietnam in 
1958 (The View jrom the Seventh Floor, pp. 39 and 152). 
Similarly, the Communist planners probed the “free world spec¬ 
trum of defense 55 in Northern Azerbaijan and Greece (where 
Stalin “supported substantial guerrilla warfare 55 — ibid., pp. 
36 and 148), operating from plans carefully laid in 1945. And 
in Central Europe, the Soviet Union was not “prepared to 
accept a solution which would remove the dangerous tensions 
from Central Europe at the risk of even slowly staged corro¬ 
sion of communism in East Germany 55 {ibid., p. 156). 

It is interesting to compare these observations with studies by 
scholars actually concerned with historical events. The remark 
about Stalin's initiating the first Vietnamese war in 1946 does 
not even merit refutation. As to Hanoi's purported initiative of 
1958, the situation is more clouded. But even government 
sources 8 concede that in 1959 Hanoi received the first direct 
reports of what Diem referred to 9 as his own Algerian war, and 


327 


* - AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

that only after this did they lay their plans to involve them¬ 
selves in this struggle. In fact, in December 1958 Hanoi made 
another of its many attempts—rebuffed once again by Saigon 
and the United States—to establish diplomatic and commercial 
relations with the Saigon government on the basis of the status 
quo. 10 Rostow offers no evidence of Stalin’s support for the 
Greek guerrillas: in fact, though the historical record is far from 
clear, it seems that Stalin was by no means pleased with the 
adventurism of the Greek guerrillas, who, from his point of 
view, were upsetting the satisfactory postwar imperialist settle¬ 
ment. 11 

Rostow’s remarks about Germany are more interesting still. 
He does not see fit to mention, for example, the Russian notes 
of March-April 1952, which proposed unification of Germany 
under internationally supervised elections, with withdrawal of 
all troops within a year, if there was a guarantee that a reuni¬ 
