1. Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., The Bitter Heritage: Vietnam and 
American Democracy (Boston, Houghton Mifflin Company, 1967), p. 
34. 

2. “Twilight of Idols,” in The World of Randolph Bourne, ed. Lillian 
Schlissel (New York, E. P. Dutton & Co., Inc., 1965), pp. 198-99. 

3. Ibid., p. 202. 

4. Boston Globe, March 13, 1968. 

5. Samuel P. Huntington, “Why the Viet Cong Attacked the Cities,” 
Boston Globe, February 17, 1968. See page 42 below for some quo¬ 
tations. 

20 


Introduction 


Professor Huntington has since expanded on these thoughts in “The 
Bases of Accommodation,” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 46, No. 4 (July 1968), 
pp. 642-56. He explains that the Viet Cong is “a powerful force which 
cannot be dislodged from its constituency so long as the constituency con¬ 
tinues to exist.” Evidently, we must therefore ensure that the constitu¬ 
ency—the rural population—ceases to exist. A Himmler or a Streicher 
would have advanced one obvious solution. This liberal social scientist, 
however, suggests another: that we drive the peasants into the cities by 
force (“urbanization”), putting off until after the war the “massive gov¬ 
ernment programs” that “will be required either to resettle migrants in 
rural areas or to rebuild the cities and promote peacetime urban employ¬ 
ment.” This policy may prove to be “the answer to ‘wars of national 
liberation,’ ” an answer that we have “stumbled upon” in Vietnam, “in 
an absent-minded way.” 

Professor Huntington disputes the view of Sir Robert Thompson that 
peasant-based insurgency is immune “to the direct application of mechani¬ 
cal and conventional power.” Not so: “. . . in the light of recent events, 
this statement needs to be seriously qualified. For if the ‘direct applica¬ 
tion of mechanical and conventional power’ takes place on such a massive 
scale as to produce a massive migration from countryside to city, the 
basic assumptions underlying the Maoist doctrine of revolutionary war 
no longer operate. The Maoist-inspired rural revolution is undercut by the 
American-sponsored urban revolution.” 

It is helpful to have this explanation, from a leading political scientist, 
of the “basic assumptions” underlying the American doctrine of counter¬ 
revolutionary war. 

