violent resistance of the populace. Where this is not the case, 
there is no help in any parliamentary opposition or any Platonic 
appeals to the constitution. One compels respect from others 
when one knows how to defend one’s dignity as a human being. 
This is not only true in private life; it has always been the same in 
political life as well. 11 

To me it seems that the revival of anarchist thinking in the 
“New Left” and the attempts to put it into effect are the most 
promising development of the past years, and that if this devel¬ 
opment can solidify, it offers some real hope that the present 
American crisis will not become an American and world catas¬ 
trophe. 

In the decade of indifference, Albert Einstein once described 
the importance of the War Resisters’ League in these terms: 


19 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


... by union, it relieves courageous and resolute individuals of 
the paralyzing feeling of isolation and loneliness, and in this way 
gives them moral support in the fulfillment of what they consider 
to be their duty. The existence of such a moral elite is indispen¬ 
sable for the preparation of a fundamental change in public opin¬ 
ion, a change which, under present-day circumstances, is abso¬ 
lutely necessary if humanity is to survive. 12 

In the past few years the “moral elite” has grown to a consid¬ 
erable force among the young, and is searching for ways to 
unite and to act both as a political and a moral force. It remains 
to be seen whether this can become a creative and self-sustain¬ 
ing tradition, not dependent on exterior events for its survival, 
and whether it can unite with other forces for constructive 
change. If it can do so, we may be able to come to grips with 
the problems that plague us. We may also be able to avoid a 
fate that was—according to an often quoted story—outlined by 
Einstein on another occasion, when he was asked what sort of 
weapons might be used in a possible Third World War. His 
answer was that he did not know what weapons would be used 
in World War III, but he was sure that the Fourth World War 
would be fought with stones and clubs. 


Notes 

1. Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., The Bitter Heritage: Vietnam and 
American Democracy (Boston, Houghton Mifflin Company, 1967), p. 
34. 

2. “Twilight of Idols,” in The World of Randolph Bourne, ed. Lillian 
Schlissel (New York, E. P. Dutton & Co., Inc., 1965), pp. 198-99. 

3. Ibid., p. 202. 

4. Boston Globe, March 13, 1968. 

5. Samuel P. Huntington, “Why the Viet Cong Attacked the Cities,” 
Boston Globe, February 17, 1968. See page 42 below for some quo¬ 
tations. 

20 


Introduction 


Professor Huntington has since expanded on these thoughts in “The 
Bases of Accommodation,” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 46, No. 4 (July 1968), 
pp. 642-56. He explains that the Viet Cong is “a powerful force which 
cannot be dislodged from its constituency so long as the constituency con¬ 
tinues to exist.” Evidently, we must therefore ensure that the constitu¬ 
ency—the rural population—ceases to exist. A Himmler or a Streicher 
would have advanced one obvious solution. This liberal social scientist, 
however, suggests another: that we drive the peasants into the cities by 
force (“urbanization”), putting off until after the war the “massive gov¬ 
ernment programs” that “will be required either to resettle migrants in 
rural areas or to rebuild the cities and promote peacetime urban employ¬ 
ment.” This policy may prove to be “the answer to ‘wars of national 
liberation,’ ” an answer that we have “stumbled upon” in Vietnam, “in 
an absent-minded way.” 

Professor Huntington disputes the view of Sir Robert Thompson that 
peasant-based insurgency is immune “to the direct application of mechani¬ 
cal and conventional power.” Not so: “. . . in the light of recent events, 
this statement needs to be seriously qualified. For if the ‘direct applica¬ 
tion of mechanical and conventional power’ takes place on such a massive 
scale as to produce a massive migration from countryside to city, the 
basic assumptions underlying the Maoist doctrine of revolutionary war 
no longer operate. The Maoist-inspired rural revolution is undercut by the 
American-sponsored urban revolution.” 

It is helpful to have this explanation, from a leading political scientist, 
of the “basic assumptions” underlying the American doctrine of counter¬ 
revolutionary war. 

