dedication of the guerrillas. Throughout history, however, colo¬ 
nial administrators have had their difficulties in comprehending 
or coming to grips with this phenomenon. 

In the course of his analysis of our dilemma in Vietnam, Pool 
explains some of the aspects of our culture that make it difficult 
for us to understand such matters clearly. We live in “a guilt 
culture in which there is a tradition of belief in equality.” For 
such reasons, we find it hard to understand the true nature of 
Vietcong land redistribution, which is primarily “a patronage 
operation” in which “dissatisfied peasants band together in a 
gang to despoil their neighbors” and “then reward the deserving 
members of the cabal.” 

This terminology recalls Franz Borkenau’s description of the 
“streak of moral indifference” in the history of Russian revolu¬ 
tionism, which permitted such atrocities as the willingness “to 
Expropriate,’ by means of robbery, the individual property of 


50 


Objectivity and Liberal' Scholarship 


individual bourgeois.” 28 Our side, in contrast, adheres to the 
“tradition of belief in equality” when we implement land re¬ 
form. For example, the New York Times, December 26, 1967, 
reports a recent conference of experts studying the “Taiwan 
success in land reform,” one of the real success stories of Ameri¬ 
can intervention. “The Government reimbursed the former 
landlords in part (30 per cent) with shares of four large public 
enterprises taken over from the Japanese. The remainder was 
paid in bonds. . . . Many speakers at the conference singled out 
the repayment as the shrewdest feature of the Taiwan program. 
It not only treated the landlords fairly, they said, but it also 
redirected the landlords’ energies and capital towards industry,” 
thus advancing the “wholesale restructuring of society” in the 
only healthy and humane direction. 

In a side remark, Pool states that “in lay public debates now 
going on one often hears comments to the effect that Viet¬ 
namese communism, because it is anti-Chinese, would be like 
Yugoslav communism.” It would, of course, be ridiculous to 
argue such a causal connection, and, in fact, I have never heard 
it proposed in “lay public debate” or anywhere else. Rather, 
what has been maintained by such laymen as Hans Morgen- 
thau, General James Gavin, and others is that Vietnamese 
Communism is likely to be Titoist, in the sense that it will strive 
for independence from Chinese domination. Thus they reject 
the claim that by attacking Vietnamese Communism we are 
somehow “containing Chinese Communism”—a claim implied, 
for example, in the statement of the “Citizens Committee for 
Peace with Freedom in Vietnam,” in which Ithiel Pool, Milton 
Sacks, and others, speaking for “the understanding, independ¬ 
ent and responsible men and women who have consistently 
opposed rewarding international aggressors from Adolf Hitler 
to Mao Tse-tung,” warn that if we “abandon Vietnam,” then 


51 


* = AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

“Peking and Hanoi, flushed with success, [will] continue their 
expansionist policy through many other ‘wars of liberation.’ ” By 
misstating the reference to Titoist tendencies, Pool avoids the 
difficulty of explaining how an anti-Chinese North Vietnam is 
serving as the agent of Hitlerian aggression from Peking; by 
referring to “lay public debate,” he hopes, I presume, to dis¬ 
guise the failure of argument by a claim to expertise. 

Returning again to the Asian Survey Vietnam symposium, the 
most significant contribution is surely Edward Mitchell’s discus¬ 
sion of his RAND Corporation study on “the significance of 
land tenure in the Vietnamese insurgency.” In a study of twenty- 
six provinces, Mitchell has discovered a significant correlation 
between “inequality of land tenure” and “extent of Government 
[read: American] control.” In brief, “greater inequality 
implies greater control.” “Provinces seem to be more secure 
when the percentage of owner-operated land is low (tenancy 
is high); inequality in the distribution of farms by size is 
great; large, formerly French-owned estates are present; 
and no land redistribution has taken place.” To explain 
this phenomenon, Mitchell turns to history and behavioral 
psychology. As he notes, “in a number of historical cases 
it has been the better-to-do peasant who has revolted, 
while his poorer brothers actively supported or passively ac¬ 
cepted the existing order.” The “behavioral explanation” lies “in 
the relative docility of poorer peasants and the firm authority of 
landlords in the more ‘feudal’ areas . . . the landlord can exer¬ 
cise considerable influence over his tenant’s behavior and read¬ 
ily discourage conduct inconsistent with his own interests.” 

In an interview with the New York Times (October 15, 1967), 
Mitchell adds an additional explanation for the fact that the 
most secure areas are those that remain “essentially feudal in 
social structure”: when the feudal structure is eliminated, 
