achieve independence from foreign domination or to overthrow 
semifeudal structures supported by foreign powers, or if the 
Chinese irrationally refuse to respond properly to the schedule 
of reinforcement that we have prepared for them, if they object 
to being encircled by the benign and peace-loving “rich men” 
who control the territories on their borders as a natural right, 
then, evidently, we must respond to this belligerence with ap¬ 
propriate force. 

It is this mentality that explains the frankness with which the 
United States government and its academic apologists defend 
the American refusal to permit a political settlement in Vietnam 
at a local level, a settlement based on the actual distribution of 
political forces. Even government experts freely admit that the 
National Liberation Front is the only “truly mass-based political 
party in South Vietnam”; 33 that the NLF had “made a con¬ 
scious and massive effort to extend political participation, even 
if it was manipulated, on the local level so as to involve the peo¬ 
ple in a self-contained, self-supporting revolution” (p. 374); 
and that this effort had been so successful that no political 
groups, “with the possible exception of the Buddhists, thought 
themselves equal in size and power to risk entering into a coali¬ 
tion, fearing that if they did the w T hale would swallow the min¬ 
now” (p. 362). Moreover, they concede that until the introduc¬ 
tion of overwhelming American force, the NLF had insisted 
that the struggle “should be fought out at the political level and 
that the use of massed military might was in itself illegitimate. 
. . . The battleground was to be the minds and loyalties of the 
rural Vietnamese, the weapons were to be ideas” (pp. 91-92; cf. 
also pp. 93, 99-108, 155 f.); and correspondingly, that until mid- 
1964, aid from Hanoi “was largely confined to two areas—doc- 


350 


The Responsibility of Intellectuals 


trinal know-how and leadership personnel” (p. 321). Captured 
NLF documents contrast the enemy's “military superiority” 
with their own “political superiority” (p. 106), thus fully con¬ 
firming the analysis of American military spokesmen who define 
our problem as how, “with considerable armed force but little 
political power, [to] contain an adversary who has enormous 
political force but only modest military power.” 34 

Similarly, the most striking outcome of both the Honolulu 
conference in February and the Manila conference in October 
was the frank admission by high officials of the Saigon govern¬ 
ment that “they could not survive a ‘peaceful settlement' that 
left the Vietcong political structure in place even if the Viet- 
cong guerrilla units were disbanded,” that “they are not able to 
compete politically with the Vietnamese Communists.” 35 Thus, 
Mohr continues, the Vietnamese demand a “pacification pro¬ 
gram” which will have as “its core ... the destruction of the 
clandestine Vietcong political structure and the creation of an 
iron-like system of government political control over the popu¬ 
lation.” And from Manila, the same correspondent, on October 
23, quotes a high South Vietnamese official as saying: “Frankly, 
we are not strong enough now to compete with the Communists 
on a purely political basis. They are organized and disciplined. 
The non-Communist nationalists are not—we do not have any 
large, well-organized political parties and we do not yet have 
unity. We cannot leave the Vietcong in existence.” Officials in 
Washington understand the situation very well. Thus Secretary 
Rusk has pointed out that “if the Vietcong come to the confer¬ 
ence table as full partners they will, in a sense, have been 
victorious in the very aims that South Vietnam and the United 
States are pledged to prevent” (January 28, 1966). Similarly, 
Max Frankel reported from Washington: “Compromise has had 
no appeal here because the Administration concluded long ago 


351 


AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


that the non-Communist forces of South Vietnam could not 
long survive in a Saigon coalition with Communists. It is for that 
reason—and not because of an excessively rigid sense of proto¬ 
col—that Washington has steadfastly refused to deal with the 
Vietcong or recognize them as an independent political force .” 36 

In short, we will—magnanimously—permit Vietcong repre¬ 
sentatives to attend negotiations, but only if they will agree to 
identify themselves as agents of a foreign power and thus forfeit 
the right to participate in a coalition government, a right which 
they have now been demanding for a half-dozen years. We know 
well that in any representative coalition, our chosen delegates 
could not last a day without the support of American arms. 
Therefore, we must increase American force and resist mean¬ 
ingful negotiations, until the day when a client government can 
exert both military and political control over its own population 
—a day which may never dawn, for as William Bundy has 
pointed out, we could never be sure of the security of a South¬ 
east Asia “from which the Western presence was effectively 
withdrawn.” Thus if we were to “negotiate in the direction of 
