sistance” by widening the war might still meet with success, so 
that “we may all be saluting the wisdom and statesmanship of the 
American government.” Schlesinger’s critique of the policy of es¬ 
calation is “pragmatic,” in that it does not question our ends but 
only the likelihood of our achieving them. In this sense it is 
“responsible criticism”; it diverges from the approach of the 
Johnson administration, or for that matter, the position of the 
“responsible” critics who take a stronger imperialist position, 
only in its judgment as to the potential effectiveness of certain 
methods that are being employed in our attempt to organize 
Vietnamese society in our perceived interest and in what we 
determine to be the interests of the Vietnamese. Investigation 


296 


The Bitter Heritage 


of this liberal critique shows how remote from the mainstream 
of American opinion, that opinion which might be influential in 
decision making, is a point of view that would be considered 
quite moderate in the spectrum of world opinion: namely, that 
the United States has no unilateral right to determine by force 
the course of development of the nations of the Third World. 

As a specimen of liberal American ideology, Schlesinger’s 
book also provides some insight into one fairly significant aspect 
of the complex matter of imperialist expansion. No doubt ideol¬ 
ogy has its roots in real or at least perceived interests; it is, 
however, no novel observation that ideology can have a life of 
its own, contributing to the design and implementation of pol¬ 
icy in a way that may, on occasion, even conflict with the inter¬ 
ests from which it arose. The postwar American anti-Commu- 
nist paranoia provides many examples. In part, it provided a 
convenient—and occasionally plausible—justification for the 
kind of interventionism that had long characterized American 
policy, in ever extending domains. In part it no doubt func¬ 
tioned as an almost independent basis for specific policy deci¬ 
sions, leading to actions that go beyond what is demanded by 
the interests that foreign policy in a general way attempts to 
serve. Our China policy provides a number of examples of this 
phenomenon. Another is the behavior of the Eisenhower admin¬ 
istration in Cuba in 1960 (as described by Ambassador Philip 
Bonsai in Foreign Affairs , January 1967), when the Castro gov¬ 
ernment demanded that American and British oil refineries 
process Soviet rather than Venezuelan oil. Although “the com¬ 
panies would probably have reluctantly gone along with the 
[Castro] government’s request,” strong pressure from Washing¬ 
ton impelled them to refuse, leading to expropriation and a 
sharp worsening of Cuban-American relations. Such incidents, 
and there are many, are interesting for those concerned with 


297 


* = AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 

the dynamics of imperialism in the modern period. Schlesinger’s 
approach to the Vietnam war provides some understanding of 
the cultural factors that are involved in this complex interaction 
of real or perceived material interests, ideology, and govern¬ 
ment initiative. 

Schlesinger’s critique of current Vietnam policy is also inter¬ 
esting because of the role of its author in the Kennedy adminis¬ 
tration, when much of the groundwork for the present tragedy 
in Vietnam was laid. In this respect, it is of some value to 
“Washington watchers,” that is, to those who are interested in 
determining how American foreign policy develops and how it 
appears to those involved in its implementation. 

It is, for example, of interest to learn of the extent to which 
Schlesinger attributes our present tribulations to bureaucratic 
stupidity rather than Machiavellian intent. He raises the ques¬ 
tion, “which already haunts the American conscience,” as to 
whether we are “really carrying out this policy, as we constantly 
proclaim, to save the people we are methodically destroying,” 
or are we “doing it for less exalted purposes of our own. 7 ’ The 
question is not directly answered, but the implication is that 
stupidity and ignorance, rather than pursuit of self-interest, are 
to blame for the bitter heritage. Viewing the development of 
American policy from the outside, it seems not too difficult to 
construct a rationale. But Schlesinger’s judgment must be given 
weight. After all, he was there. 

Still, it is questionable how widely Schlesinger’s view of 
American innocence is shared. For example, he admits that 
there may appear to be “a gigantic American effort at the encir¬ 
clement and strangulation of China.” But, he asserts, this is not 
“our view of what we are doing; nor is it in fact what we are 
doing,” though “it really should not astonish us that a crew of 
dogmatic Marxist-Leninists should so interpret the extraordi- 


298 


