
AMERICAN POWER AND THE NEW MANDARINS 


largely unarmed. For a summary of relevant evidence, see Draper, op. cit., 
and I. F. Stone, “A Reply to the White Paper,” in I. F. Stone’s 
Weekly, March 8, 1965, reprinted in Marcus G. Raskin and Bernard B. 
Fall, eds., The Vietnam Reader (New York, Vintage, 1965), pp. 155-62. 
The “White Paper” itself, along with Stone’s devastating analysis, is re¬ 
printed in Martin E. Gettleman, ed., Vietnam: History, Documents, and 
Opinions on a Major World Crisis (Greenwich, Conn., Fawcett, 1965), 
pp. 284-316. 

71. See for example, P. J. Honey, “The Foreign Policy of North 
Vietnam,” in John D. Montgomery and Albert 0. Hirschman, eds., 
Public Policy (Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press, 1967), 
Vol. 16, pp. 160-S0. Honey cites as one of the “main requirements of 
North Vietnamese foreign policy,” “to resist Chinese attempts to 
dominate Vietnam.” Similarly, in his Communism in North Vietnam 
(Cambridge, Mass., The M.I.T. Press, 1963), he points out that Pham 
Van Dong, second in command in North Vietnam, is “no political 
extremist but rather a cautious moderate” who “has stated that he 
believes Asia’s problems can be solved only through cooperation with 
the white races,” and that Vo Nguyen Giap is violently anti-Chinese— 
it is for this reason, he goes on to say, that he remains in control of 
the army. In fact, Honey concludes, “there are excellent grounds for 
the belief that the principal raison d’etre of such a powerful army in 
North Vietnam today is to protect North Vietnam against possible 
Chinese aggression.” Similar views are expressed by just about every¬ 
one who has considered the matter. It is particularly interesting that 
they are shared by Honey, whose militant anti-Communism reaches 
outlandish levels and frequently leads him to pure fabrication—e.g., 
his contention that the North Vietnamese refused to agree to negotia¬ 
tions at the beginning of 1965 ( Public Policy, Vol. 16, p. 180)—and 
to amazing allegations, for example, that some significant portion of the 
antiwar activity in Britain and the United States is initiated by the Com¬ 
munist parties and financed by Hanoi—including, as a special reward to 
loyal supporters, free trips to North Vietnam {ibid., p. 168). One won¬ 
ders whether his analyses of North Vietnam, which are apparently taken 
seriously by policy planners, show as much of a sense of reality as his 
perception of events in Britain and the United States. 

72. It is worth recalling that the Soviet Union has much better rea¬ 
sons than we do for taking seriously the lesson of Munich. 

73. Op. cit., p. 298. 


990 


The Logic of Withdrawal 


74. See Arthur J. Dommen, Conflict in Laos: The Politics of Neu¬ 
tralization (New York, Frederick A. Praeger, Inc., 1964), p. 136. 

75. See Buttinger, op. cit.; Kahin and Lewis, op. cit. It is interesting 
to look back to the reports dating from the period in question, before 
the necessity arose to rewrite history so as to justify later overt Ameri¬ 
can aggression. For example, William Henderson, at the time an ex¬ 
ecutive of the Council on Foreign Relations specializing in Far East¬ 
ern affairs, wrote: “From the beginning Diem ran his government 
along the lines of a police state,” with vigorous suppression of political 
opposition, totalitarian methods to stimulate popular support, and so 
on. “By the middle of 1956 . . . Diem had still to prove that his 
professed devotion to the democratic cause represented anything more 
than a fagade to disguise the increasingly plain reality of stern dic¬ 
tatorship.” By 1958, there had “been little moderation of the grim 
dictatorship which Diem has exerted from the beginning.” “One result 
[of this grim dictatorship] has been the growing alienation of the 
intelligentsia. . . . Another has been the renewal of armed dissidence in 
the South” (Lindholm, op. cit., pp. 343 f.). In the same volume, 
David Hotham, correspondent for the London Times and the Econ¬ 
omist in Vietnam from 1955 to 1957, describes the “pacification” 
methods of the South Vietnamese army: “They consist of killing, or 
arresting without either evidence or trial, large numbers of persons 
suspected of being Vietminh or ‘rebels’” (p. 359). Possibly these 
events had as much to do with the renewal of insurgency as Mao’s 
musings about the East and the West Wind. 

As to the shift from “peaceful coexistence,” it is interesting to note 
that the Third Party Congress of the Lao Dong party of North Viet¬ 
nam, in September 1960, announced a major defense cutback to finance 
economic development. At the time, P. J. Honey summarized the 

results of this congress as indicating that “Vietnam will follow the 

Russian policy of peaceful co-existence based on the possibility of 
avoiding war” (“North Vietnam’s Party Congress,” China Quarterly, 
No. 4 [October-December 1960], p. 74; cited in Kahin and Lewis, op. 
cit., p. 116). Bernard Fall makes the same point (Last Reflections on 
a War, p. 203). Now, however, the official line is that at this congress 
the Lao Dong party set out on its attempt to conquer the South, and, 
as Hilsman puts it (op. cit., p. 419), the NLF was “duly formed” a 
few months later. For discussion of the forming of the NLF from 

somewhat more independent sources, see Buttinger, op. cit., Kahin 

291 
