well known, for example, from the account given by Orwell, who 
served under his command (see Orwell, op. cit., pp. 209 f.). Orwell 
was also able to refute, from firsthand observation, many of the other 
absurdities that were appearing in the liberal press about the Aragon 
front, for example, the statement by Ralph Bates in the New Republic 
that the POUM troops were “playing football with the Fascists in no 
man’s land.” At that moment, as Orwell observes, “the P.O.U.M. 
troops were suffering heavy casualties and a number of my personal 
friends were killed and wounded.” 

84. Cited in Living Marxism , p. 172. 

85. Bolloten, op. cit., p. 49, comments on the collectivization of the 
dairy trade in Barcelona, as follows: “The Anarchosyndicalists elimi¬ 
nated as unhygienic over forty pasteurizing plants, pasteurized all the 
milk in the remaining nine, and proceeded to displace all dealers by 
establishing their own dairies. Many of the retailers entered the collec¬ 
tive, but some refused to do so: ‘They asked for a much higher wage 
than that paid to the workers . . . , claiming that they could not 
manage on the one allotted to them’ [ Tierra y Libertad , August 21, 
1937—the newspaper of the FAI, the anarchist activists].” His infor¬ 
mation is primarily from anarchist sources, which he uses much more 
extensively than any historian other than Peirats. He does not present 
any evaluation of these sources, which—like all others—must be used 
critically. 

86. Morrow, op. cit., p. 136. 

87. Borkenau, The Spanish Cockpit, p. 182. 

88. Ibid., p. 183. 

89. Ibid., p. 184. According to Borkenau, “it is doubtful whether 
Comorera is personally responsible for this scarcity; it might have 
arisen anyway, in pace with the consumption of the harvest.” This 
speculation may or may not be correct. Like Borkenau, we can only 
speculate as to whether the village and workers’ committees would 
have been able to continue to provision Barcelona, with or without 
central administration, had it not been for the policy of “abstract 


144 


Objectivity and Liberal Scholarship 


liberalism,” which was of a piece with the general Communist-directed 
attempts to destroy the Revolutionary organizations and the structures 
developed in the Revolutionary period. 
