5. The education of the prisoner is for the authorities both an 
indispensable precaution in the interests of society and an obligation 
to the prisoner. ‘Education alone may serve as a penitentiary 
instrument. The question of penitentiary imprisonment is a question 
of education’ (Lucas, 1838). 1945: ‘The treatment meted out to the 
prisoner, outside any corrupting promiscuity ... must be directed 
principally to his general and professional instruction and to his 
improvement.’ The principle of penitentiary education. 

6. The prison regime must, at least in part, be supervised and 
administered by a specialized staff possessing the moral qualities and 
technical abilities required of educators. In 1850, on the subject of 
prison medicine, Ferrus remarked: ‘It is a useful addition to all 
forms of imprisonment ... no one could possess more intimately 
than a physician the trust of the prisoners, know their characters 
better, influence their mental attitudes more effectively, while reliev¬ 
ing their physical ills and, by this means, reprimand or encourage 
as he thinks fit.’ 1945: ‘In every penitentiary establishment, there 
functions a social and medico-psychological service.’ The principle 
of the technical supervision of detention. 

7. Imprisonment must be followed by measures of supervision and 
assistance until the rehabilitation of the former prisoner is complete. 
Not only must he be placed under surveillance on leaving prison, 
‘but he must be given help and support’ (Boulet and Benquot at the 
Chambre de Paris). 1945: ‘Assistance is given to prisoners during 
and after imprisonment with a view to facilitating their rehabilita¬ 
tion.’ The principle of auxiliary institutions. 

Word for word, from one century to the other, the same funda¬ 
mental propositions are repeated. They reappear in each new, hard- 
won, finally accepted formulation of a reform that has hitherto 
always been lacking. The same sentences or almost the same could 
have been borrowed from other ‘fruitful’ periods of reform: the end 
of the nineteenth century and the ‘movement of social defence’; or 
again, the last few years, with the prisoners’ revolts. 


270 



Illegalities and delinquency 


One must not, therefore, regard the prison, its ‘failure’ and its 
more or less successful reform as three successive stages. One 
should think rather of a simultaneous system that historically has 
been superimposed on the juridical deprivation of liberty; a fourfold 
system comprising; the additional, disciplinary element of the prison 
