

232 



Complete and austere institutions 


punishments, though contrary to the strict theory of penal law, 
that one is in prison in order to ‘pay one’s debt’. The prison is 
‘namral’, just as the use of time to measure exchanges is ‘natural’ 
in our society.^ 

But the self-evidence of the prison is also based on its role, 
supposed or demanded, as an apparatus for transforming individuals. 
How could the prison not be immediately accepted when, by locking 
up, retraining and rendering docile, it merely reproduces, with a 
little more emphasis, all the mechanisms that are to be found in the 
social body? The prison is like a rather disciplined barracks, a strict 
school, a dark workshop, but not qualitatively different. This double 
foundation - juridico-economic on the one hand, technico-disciplin- 
ary on the other - made the prison seem the most immediate and 
civilized form of all penalties. And it is this double functioning that 
immediately gave it its solidity. One thing is clear: the prison was 
not at first a deprivation of liberty to which a technical function of 
correction was later added; it was from the outset a form of ‘legal 
detention’ entrusted with an additional corrective task, or an enter¬ 
prise for reforming individuals that the deprivation of liberty 
allowed to function in the legal system. In short, penal imprison¬ 
ment, from the beginning of the nineteenth century, covered both 
the deprivation of liberty and the technical transformation of 
individuals. 

Let us remember a number of facts. In the codes of 1808 and i8io, 
and the measures that immediately preceded or followed them, 
imprisonment was never confused with mere deprivation of liberty. 
It was, or in any case had to be, a differentiated and finalized mechan¬ 
ism. Differentiated because it had to have the same form, whether 
the prisoner had been sentenced or was merely accused, whether he 
was a minor offender or a criminal: the various types of prison - 
maison d’arret, maison de correction, maison centrale — ought in 
principle to correspond more or less to these differences and provide 
a punishment that would be not only graduated in intensity, but 
diversified in its ends. For the prison has a purpose, which is laid 
down at the outset: ‘The law inflicting penalties, some of which are 
more serious than others, cannot allow the individual condemned 
to light penalties to be imprisoned in the same place as the criminal 
condemned to more serious penalties_although the penalty fixed 

