14 Cf the criticism made by Rush of punitive spectacles, in particular 
those imagined by Dufriche du Valaz6 (Rush, 5-9). 

PART THREE DISCIPLINE 

I Docile bodies 

1 I shall choose examples from military, medical, educational and 
industrial institutions. Other examples might have been taken from 
colonization, slavery and child rearing. 

2 Cf what La Metherie wrote after a visit to Le Creusot: ‘The buildings 
for so fine an establishment and so large a quantity of different work 
should cover a sufficient area, so that there will be no confusion among 
the workers during working time’ (La Metherie, 66). 

3 J.-B. de la Salle, Conduite des ecoles chretiennes, B.N. Ms. 11759, 248-9. 
A little earlier Batencour proposed that classrooms should be divided 
into three parts: ‘The most honourable for those who are learning 
Latin. . . It should be stressed that there are as many places at the 
tables as there will be writers, in order to avoid the confusion usually 
caused by the lazy.’ In another, those who are learning to read: a bench 


314 



Notes 


for the rich and a bench for the poor ‘so that vermin will not be passed 
on’. A third section for newcomers: ‘When their ability has been 
recognized, they will be given a place’ (M.I.D.B., 56-7). 

4 The success of the Prussian troops can only be attributed, to the 
‘excellence of their discipline and their exercise; the choice of exercise 
is not therefore a matter of indifference; in Prussia the subject has been 
studied for forty years with unremitting application’ (Saxe, II, 
249). 

5 Writing exercise: ‘... 9: Hands on the knees. This command is con¬ 
veyed by one ring on the bell; to: hands on the table, head up; ii: 
clean the slates: everyone cleans his slate with a little saliva, or better 
still with a piece of rag; 12: show the slates; 13: monitors, inspect. 
They inspect the slates with their assistants and then those of their 
own bench. The assistants inspect those of their own bench and every¬ 
one returns to his own place.’ 

6 This mixture appears clearly in certain classes of the apprenticeship 
contract: the master is obliged to give his pupil - in exchange for his 
money and his labour - all his knowledge, without keeping any secret 
from him; otherwise, he is liable to a fine. Cf., for example, Grosre- 
naud, 62. 

7 F. de la Noue recommended the creation of military academies at the 
end of the sixteenth century, suggesting that one should learn in them 
‘howto handle horses, to practise with the dagger, with and without 
shield, to fence, to perform on horseback, to jump; if swimming and 
wrestling were added, it would be to the good, for all this makes the 
person robust and more subtle’ (Noue, 181-2). 

8 Through the schools at Li^ge, Devenport, Zwolle, Wesel; and thanks 
also to Jean Sturm and his memorandum of 1538 for the organization 
of a gymnasium at Strasburg. Cf. Bulletin de la societe d’histoire du 
protestantisme, XXV, 499—505. 

It should be noted that the relations between the army, religious 
organization and education are very complex. The ‘decury’, the unit of 
the Roman army, is to be found in Benedictine monasteries, as the 
unit of work and no doubt of supervision. The Brothers of the Com¬ 
mon Life borrowed it and adapted it to their own education organiza¬ 
tion: the pupils were grouped in-tens. It was this unit that the Jesuits 
took up in the scenography of their schools, thus reintroducing a 
military model. But the decury was replaced in turn by an even more 
military schema, with ranks, columns, lines. 

9 Guibert, 18. In fact, this very old problem came into the forefront 
once more in the eighteenth century, for the economic and technical 


315 



Notes 


reasons that we are about to see; and the ‘prejudice’ in question had 
been discussed very often by others besides Guibert himself (followers 
of Folard, Pirch, Mesnil-Durand). 

10 In the sense in which this term was used after 1759. 

11 The movement that brought the rifle into widespread use may be 
roughly dated from the battle of Steinkirk, 1699. 

12 On this importance of geometry, see J. de Beausobre; ‘The science of 
war is essentially geometrical. .. The arrangement of a battalion and 
a squadron on a whole front and at so much height is alone the eflFect 
