one might say that the definition of offences and their prosecution 
are carried out in turn in order to maintain the punitive mechanisms 
and their functions). From this point of view, Rusche and Kirch- 
heimer relate the different systems of punishment with the systems 
of production within which they operate: thus, in a slave economy. 


24 




The body of the condemned 


punitive mechanisms serve to provide an additional labour force - 
and to constitute a body of‘civil’ slaves in addition to those provided 
by war or trading; with feudalism, at a time when money and pro¬ 
duction were still at an early stage of development, we find a sudden 
increase in corporal punishments - the body being in most cases the 
only property accessible; the penitentiary (the Hdpital General, the 
Spinhuis or the Rasphuis), forced labour and the prison factory 
appear with the development of the mercantile economy. But the 
industrial system requires a free market in labour andj in the nine¬ 
teenth century, the role of forced labour in the mechanisms of 
punishment diminishes accordingly and ‘corrective’ detention takes 
its place. There are no doubt a number of observations to be made 
about such a strict correlation. 

But we can surely accept the general proposition that, in our 
societies, the systems of punishment are to be situated in a certain 
‘political economy’ of the body: even if they do not make use of 
violent or bloody punishment, even when they use ‘lenient’ methods 
involving confinement or correction, it is always the body that is at 
issue - the body and its forces, their utility and their docility, their 
distribution and their submission. It is certainly legitimate to write 
a history of punishment against the background of moral ideas or 
legal structures. But can one write such a history against the back¬ 
ground of a history of bodies, when such systems of punishment 
claim to have only the secret souls of criminals as their objective.^ 

Historians long ago began to write the history of the body. They 
have studied the body in the field of historical demography or 
pathology; they have considered it as the seat of needs and appetites, 
as the locus of physiological processes and metabolisms, as a target 
for the attacks of germs or viruses; they have shown to what extent 
historical processes were involved in what might seem to be the 
purely biological base of existence; and what place should be given 
in the history of society to biological ‘events’ such as the circulation 
of bacilli, or the extension of the life-span (cf. Le Roy-Ladurie). 
But the body is also directly involved in a political field; power 
relations have an immediate hold upon it; they invest it, mark it, 
train it, torture it, force it to carry out tasks, to perform ceremonies, 
to emit signs. This political investment of the body is bound up, 
in accordance with complex reciprocal relations, with its economic 


25 




Torture 


use; it is largely as a force of production that the body is invested 
with relations of power and domination; but, on the other hand, its 
constitution as labour power is possible only if it is caught up in a 
system of subjection (in which need is also a political instrument 
meticulously prepared, calculated and used); the body becomes a 
useful force only if it is both a productive body and a subjected body. 
This subjection is not only obtained by the instruments of violence 
or ideology; it can also be direct, physical, pitting force against 
force, bearing on material elements, and yet without involving 
violence; it may be calculated, organized, technically thought out; 
it may be subtle, make use neither of weapons nor of terror and yet 
remain of a physical order. That is to say, there may be a ‘knowledge’ 
of the body that is not exactly the science of its functioning, and a 
mastery of its forces that is more than the ability to conquer them: 
this knowledge and this mastery constitute what might be called the 
political technology of the body. Of course, this technology is 
diffuse, rarely formulated in continuous, systematic discourse; it is 
often made up of bits and pieces; it implements a disparate set of 
tools or methods. In spite of the coherence of its results, it is 
generally no more than a multiform instrumentarion. Moreover, it 
cannot be localized in a particular type of institution or state 
apparatus. For they have recourse to it; they use, select or impose 
certain of its methods. But, in its mechanisms and its effects, it is 
situated at a quite different level. What the apparatuses and institu¬ 
tions operate is, in a sense, a micro-physics of power, whose field 
of validity is situated in a sense between these great functionings 
and the bodies themselves with their materiality and their forces. 

Now, the study of this micro-physics presupposes that the power 
exercised on the body is conceived not as a property, but as a 
strategy, that its effects of domination are attributed not to ‘appro¬ 
priation’, but to dispositions, manoeuvres, tactics, techniques, 
functionings; that one should decipher in it a network of relations, 
constantly in tension, in activity, rather than a privilege that one 
might possess; that one should take as its model a perpetual battle 
