and rewards that is a way not simply of gaining respect for the prison 
regulations, but of making the action of the prison on the inmates 
effective. The legal authority itself came to accept this: ‘One should 
not be surprised, said the supreme court of appeal, when consulted 
on the subject of a bill concerning the prisons, at the idea of granting 
rewards, which might consist either for the most part in money, or 
in a better diet, or even in a reduction of the duration of the penalty. 
If anything can awaken in the minds of convicts the notions of good 
and evil, bring them to moral reflections and raise them to some 
extent in their own eyes, it is the possibility of obtaining some 
reward’ (Lucas, II, 441-2). 

And it must be admitted that the legal authorities can have no 
immediate control over all these procedures that rectify the penalty 
as it proceeds. It is a question, in effect, of measures that by 
definition can intervene only after the sentence and can bear only on 
something other than the offences. Those who administer detention 
must therefore have an indispensable autonomy, when it comes to 
the question of individualizing and varying the application of the 
penalty: supervisors, a prison governor, a chaplain or an instructor 
are more capable of exercising this corrective function than those 
who hold the penal power. It is their judgement (understood as 
observation, diagnosis, characterization, information, differential 
classification) and not a verdict in the form of an attribution of guilt, 
that must serve as a support for this internal modulation of the 
penalty - for its mitigation or even its interruption. When in 1846, 
Bonneville presented his project of release on licence, he defined it 
as ‘the right of the administration, with the previous approval of the 
legal authority, to place in temporary liberty, after a sufficient period 
of expiation, the completely reformed convict, on condition that he 
will be brought back into prison on the slightest well-founded 


246 




Complete and austere institutions 


complaint’ (Bonneville, 5). All this ‘arbitrariness’ which, in the 
old penal system, enabled the judges to modulate the penalty 
and the princes to ignore it if they so wished, all this arbitrariness, 
which the modern codes have withdrawn from the judicial power, 
has been gradually reconstituted on the side of the power that 
administers and supervises punishment. It is the sovereignty of 
knowledge possessed by the warder: ‘He is a veritable magistrate 
called upon to reign as sovereign in the prison ... who, in order not 
to fall short in his mission, must combine the most eminent virtue 
with a profound knowledge of mankind’ (Berenger). 

And so we arrive at a principle, clearly formulated by Charles 
Lucas, which, although it marks the virtual beginning of modern 
penal functioning, very few jurists would dare to accept today 
without some hesitation; let us call it the Declaration of Carceral 
Independence - in it is claimed the right to be a power that not only 
possesses administrative autonomy, but is also a part of punitive 
sovereignty. This affirmation of the rights of the prison posits as a 
principle: that criminal judgement is an arbitrary unity; that it must 
be broken down; that the writers of the penal codes were correct in 
distinguishing the legislative level (which classifies the acts and attri¬ 
butes penalties to them) and the judicial level (which passes the 
sentences); that the task today is to analyse in turn this later judicial 
level; that one should distinguish in it what is properly judicial 
(assess not so much acts as agents, measure ‘the intentionalities that 
give human acts so many different moralities’, and therefore rectify 
if it can the assessments of the legislator); and to give autonomy to 
‘penitentiary judgement’, which is perhaps the most important; in 
relation to it the assessment of the court is merely a ‘way of pre¬ 
judging’, for the morality of the agent can be assessed ‘only when 
put to the test. The judge, therefore, requires in turn a compulsory 
and rectifying supervision of his assessments; and this supervision 
is that provided by the penitentiary prison’ (Lucas, II, 418-22). 

One may speak, therefore, of an excess or a series of excesses on 
the part of imprisonment in terms of legal detention - of the ‘car- 
ceral’ in relation to the ‘judicial’. Now this excess was observed very 
early on, from the very birth of the prison, either in the form of real 
practices, or in the form of projects. It did not come later, as a 
secondary effect. The great carceral machinery was bound up with 


247 




Prison 


the very functioning of the prison. The sign of this autonomy is 
very apparent in the ‘useless’ acts of violence perpetrated by warders 
or in the despotism of an administration that has all the privileges of 
an enclosed community. Its roots lie elsewhere: precisely in the fact 
that the prison is required to be ‘useful’, that the deprivation of 
liberty — that juridical levying on an ideal property - must, from 
the outset, have exercised a positive technical role, operating trans¬ 
formations on individuals. And, for this operation, the carceral 
apparatus has recourse to three great schemata: the politico-moral 
