head, a Murillo face; there a vicious face, framed with thick eyebrows. 


259 




Prison 


which convey all the energy of the determined villain... Elsewhere 
the head of a Fagin emerges from the body of an urchin. Here are 
the smooth, feminine features of accomplices; there the glazed, 
debauched faces of teachers.’® The convicts themselves responded 
to this game, displaying their crimes and enacting their misdeeds: 
this was one of the functions of tattooing, a vignette of their deeds 
or their fate: ‘They bear the insignia of their crimes, either a guillo¬ 
tine tattooed on their left arms, or on their chests a dagger plunged 
into a bleeding heart.’ As they passed, they mimed the scenes of their 
crimes, mocking the judges or the police, boasting of as yet un¬ 
discovered deeds of wickedness. Fran5ois, Lacenaire’s former accom¬ 
plice, said that he had invented a method for killing a man without 
making him cry out and without spilling a single drop of blood. 
The great travelling fair of crime had its tumblers and its mummers, 
in which the comic affirmation of truth answered curiosity and invec¬ 
tive. A whole series of scenes, in this summer of 1836, took place 
around Delacollonge: his crime (he had cut his pregnant mistress 
into pieces) was made much more spectacular by the fact that he 
was a priest; this fact had also saved him from the scaffold. It seems 
that he aroused considerable hate among the people. Earlier, in the 
cart that had brought him to Paris in June 1836, he had been insulted 
and had been unable to hold back his tears; however, he had 
expressed a wish not to be conveyed in a closed carriage, believing 
that the humiliation formed part of his punishment. As he left 
Paris, ‘one cannot imagine the virtuous indignation, the moral anger 
and base actions unleashed by the crowd on this man; he was 
covered with earth and mud; stones and insults rained down upon 
him from the furious bystanders. . . It was an explosion of un¬ 
paralleled rage; the women above all, like veritable furies, displayed 
an unbelievable exaltation of hate’ {La Phalange, i August 1836). 
For his protection, his clothes had to be changed. Certain spectators 
were misled by this and thought that Frangois was he. Frangois 
entered into the spirit of the game and accepted the role; but, to the 
comedy of the crime that he did not commit, he added that of the 
priest that he was not; to the account of ‘his’ crime, he added the 
prayers and broad gestures of blessing directed at the jeering crowd. 
A few steps away, the real Delacollonge, ‘who seemed like a martyr’, 
was undergoing the double affront of the insults that he was not 

