are little short of torture, it is because it is - for the condemned man 


127 




Punishment 


and for the spectators - an object of representation. By what instru¬ 
ment did one act on the representations.^ Other representations, or 
rather couplings of ideas (crime-punishment, the imagined advan¬ 
tage of crime-disadvantage perceived in the punishments); these 
pairings could function only in the element of publicity: punitive 
scenes that established them or reinforced them in the eyes of all, a 
discourse that circulated, brought back into currency at each 
moment the complex of signs. The role of the criminal in punish¬ 
ment was to reintroduce, in the face of crime and the criminal code, 
the real presence of the signified - that is to say, of the penalty 
which, according to the terms of the code, must be infallibly associ¬ 
ated with the offence. By producing this signified abundantly and 
visibly, and therefore reactivating the signifying system of the code, 
the idea of crime functioning as a sign of punishment, it is with this 
coin that the offender pays his debt to society. Individual correction 
must, therefore, assure the process of redefining the individual as 
subject of law, through the reinforcement of the systems of signs 
and representations that they circulate. 

The apparatus of corrective penality acts in a quite different way. 
The point of application of the penalty is not the representation, but 
the body, time, everyday gestures and activities; the soul, too, but 
in so far as it is the seat of habits. The body and the soul, as prin¬ 
ciples of behaviour, form the element that is now proposed for 
punitive intervention. Rather than on an art of representations, this 
punitive intervention must rest on a studied manipulation of the 
individual: ‘I have no more doubt of every crime having its cure in 
moral and physical influence ...’; so, in order to decide on punish¬ 
ments, one ‘will require some knowledge of the principles of sensa¬ 
tion, and of the sympathies which occur in the nervous system’ 
(Rush, 13). As for the instruments used, these are no longer com¬ 
plexes of representation, reinforced and circulated, but forms of 
coercion, schemata of constraint, applied and repeated. Exercises, 
not signs: time-tables, compulsory movements, regular activities, 
solitary meditation, work in common, silence, application, respect, 
good habits. And, ultimately, what one is trying to restore in this 
technique of correction is not so much the juridical subject, who is 
caught up in the fundamental interests of the social pact, but the 
obedient subject, the individual subjected to habits, rules, orders. 


128 




The gentle way in punishment 


an authority that is exercised continually around him and upon 
him, and which he must allow to function automatically in him. 
There are two quite distinct ways, therefore, of reacting to the 
offence: one may restore the juridical subject of the social pact, or 
shape an obedient subject, according to the general and detailed 
form of some power. 

All this would no doubt amount to little more than a speculative 
difference - for in each case it is a question of forming obedient 
individuals - if the penality of ‘coercion’ did not bring with it 
certain crucial consequences. The training of behaviour by a full 
time-table, the acquisition of habits, the constraints of the body 
imply a very special relation between the individual who is punished 
and the individual who punishes him. It is a relation that not only 
renders the dimension of the spectacle useless: it excludes it.** The 
agent of punishment must exercise a total power, which no third 
party can disturb; the individual to be corrected must be entirely 
enveloped in the power that is being exercised over him. Secrecy is 
imperative, and so too is autonomy, at least in relation to this 
technique of punishment: it must have its own functioning, its own 
rules, its own techniques, its own knowledge; it must fix its own 
norms, decide its own results. There is a discontinuity, or in any 
case a specificity, in relation to the legal power that declares guilt 
and fixes the general limits of punishment. These two consequences 
- secrecy and autonomy in the exercise of the power to punish - are 
unacceptable for a theory and a policy of penality that has two aims 
in view: to get all citizens to participate in the punishment of the 
social enemy and to render the exercise of the power to punish 
entirely adequate and transparent to the laws that publicly define it. 
Secret punishments and punishments not specified in the legal code, 
a power to punish exercised in the shadows according to criteria and 
with instruments that elude control - this was enough to compro¬ 
mise the whole strategy of the reform. After the sentence, a power 
was constituted that was reminiscent of the power exercised in the 
old system. The power that applied the penalties now threatened 
to be as arbitrary, as despotic, as the power that once decided them. 

In short, the divergence is the following: punitive city or coercive 
institution.^ On the one hand, a functioning of penal power, dis¬ 
tributed throughout the social space; present everywhere as scene. 
