
Through this technique of subjection a new object was being 
formed; slowly, it superseded the mechanical body - the body com¬ 
posed of solids and assigned movements, the image of which had 
for so long haunted those who dreamt of disciplinary perfection. 
This new object is the natural body, the bearer of forces and the seat 
of duration; it is the body susceptible to specified operations, which 
have their order, their stages, their internal conditions, their con¬ 
stituent elements. In becoming the target for new mechanisms 
of power, the body is offered up to new forms of knowledge. It is 
the body of exercise, rather than of speculative physics; a body 
manipulated by authority, rather than imbued with animal spirits; 
a body of useful training and not of rational mechanics, but one in 
which, by virtue of that very fact, a number of natural requirements 
and functional constraints are beginning to emerge. This is the body 
that Guibert discovered in his critique of excessively artificial move¬ 
ments. In the exercise that is imposed upon it and which it resists, 
the body brings out its essential correlations and spontaneously 
rejects the incompatible: ‘On entering most of our training schools, 
one sees all those unfortunate soldiers in constricting and forced 
attitudes, one sees all their muscles contracted, the circulation of their 
blood interrupted. . . If we studied the intention of nature and the 
construction of the human body, we would find the position and 
the bearing that nature clearly prescribes for the soldier. The head 
must be erect, standing out from the shoulders, sitting perpendicu¬ 
larly between them. It must be turned neither to left nor to right, 
because, in view of the correspondence between the vertebrae of the 
neck and the shoulder-blade to which they are attached, none of them 
may move in a circular manner without slightly bringing with it 
from the same side that it moves one of the shoulders and because, 
the body no longer being placed squarely, the soldier can no longer 
walk straight in front of him or serve as a point of alignment. . . 
Since the hip-bone, which the ordinance indicates as the point 
against which the butt end should rest, is not situated the same in all 
men, the rifle must be placed more to the right for some, and more 
to the left for others. For the same reason of inequality of structure, 
the trigger-guard is more or less pressed against the body, depending 
on whether the outer parts of a man’s shoulder is more or less 
fleshy’ (Guibert, 21-2). 


155 




Discipline 


We have seen how the procedures of disciplinary distribution had 
