police (20-26). In particular, the following circular from the Prefect of 
police, dated 14 June 1823: ‘The establishment of houses of prostitu¬ 
tion ought naturally to be regarded with displeasure by any man who 
is concerned with public morality; I am not surprised that the Com¬ 
missioners of police oppose to the utmost of their powers the estab¬ 
lishment of houses in their various quarters. . . The police believed 
that they had done much towards public order if they had succeeded 
in enclosing prostitution within tolerated houses over which its action 
may be constant and uniform and which would not be able to escape 
surveillance.’ 

16 The book by Parent-Duchatelet on Prostitution a Paris, 1836, may be 
read as evidence of this link, encouraged by the police and penal 
institutions, between the delinquent milieu and prostitution. The case 
of the Italian Mafia transplanted to the United States and used both to 
extract illicit profits and for political ends is a fine example of the 
colonization of an illegality of popular origin. 

17 On this role of delinquents for police and especially political surveil¬ 
lance, cf. the memorandum written by Lemaire; ‘Informers’ are people 
who ‘expect indulgence for themselves’; they are usually ‘bad subjects 
who expose others who are worse still. Furthermore, it is enough for 


322 



Notes 


someone to have his name in the police register for him never to be 
lost sight of.’ 

18 Of the resistance of lawyers to participating in this functioning, there 
is abundant evidence from as early as the Restoration (which proves 
that it is in no way a recent phenomenon). In particular the liquidation 
or rather the re-utilization of the Napoleonic police posed certain 
problems. But the difficulties continued. Cf. Belleyme’s first speech 
after his appointment in 1825, in which he sought to differentiate 
himself from his predecessors: ‘Legal ways are open to us... Brought 
up in the school of law, educated in the school of so worthy a magis- 
trature ... we are the auxiliaries of justice ...’ (Belleyme)^ see also the 
very interesting pamphlet by Molene, De la libeni. 

19 For contemporary views of Lacenaire, see the dossier drawn up by 
M. Lebailly in his edition of Lacenaire’s Memoires, 1968, 297-304. 

20 The circle of the years 1835-6: Fieschi, who served the penalty com¬ 
mon to parricides and regicides, was one of the reasons why Riviere, 
