product. It is no use being surprised, therefore, that in a consider¬ 
able proportion of cases the biography of convicts passes through 
all these mechanisms and establishments, whose purpose, it is widely 
believed, is to lead away from prison. That one should find in them 
what one might call the index of an irrepressibly delinquent ‘char¬ 
acter’: the prisoner condemned to hard labour was meticulously pro¬ 
duced by a childhood spent in a reformatory, according to the lines 
of force of the generalized carceral system. Conversely, the lyricism 
of marginality may find inspiration in the image of the ‘outlaw’, the 
great social nomad, who prowls on the confines of a docile, fright¬ 
ened order. But it is not on the fringes of society and through succes¬ 
sive exiles that criminality is bom, but by means of ever more 
closely placed insertions, under ever more insistent surveillance, by 
an accumulation of disciplinary coercion. In short, the carceral 
archipelago assures, in the depths of the social body, the formation 
of delinquency on the basis of subtle illegalities, the overlapping of the 
latter by the former and the establishment of a specified criminality. 

3. But perhaps the most important effect of the carceral system 
and of its extension well beyond legal imprisonment is that it suc¬ 
ceeds in making the power to punish natural and legitimate, in 
lowering at least the threshold of tolerance to penality. It tends to 
efface what may be exorbitant in the exercise of punishment. It does 
this by playing the two registers in which it is deployed - the legal 
register of justice and the extra-legal register of discipline - against 


301 



Prison 


one another. In effect, the great continuity of the carceral system 
throughout the law and its sentences gives a sort of legal sanction 
to the disciplinary mechanisms, to the decisions and judgements 
that they enforce. Throughout this network, which comprises so 
many ‘regional’ institutions, relatively autonomous and independent, 
is transmitted, with the ‘prison-form’, the model of justice itself. 
The regulations of the disciplinary establishments may reproduce 
the law, the punishments imitate the verdicts and penalties, the 
surveillance repeat the police model; and, above all these multiple 
establishments, the prison, which in relation to them is a pure form, 
unadulterated and unmitigated, gives them a sort of official sanction. 
The carceral, with its long gradation stretching from the convict- 
ship or imprisonment with hard labour to diffuse, slight limitations, 
communicates a type of power that the law validates and that justice 
uses as its favourite weapon. How could the disciplines and the 
power that functions in them appear arbitrary, when they merely 
