318 



Notes 


8 Abbe Petigny, Allocution adressie aux prisormiers, d Voccasion de 
Vinauguration des bdtiments cdlulaires de la prison de Versailles. Cf., 
a few years later, in The Count of Monte Cristo, a very clearly Christo- 
logical version of resurrection after incarceration; in this case prison 
teaches not docility to the law, but the power, acquired through a 
secret knowledge, to dispense justice beyond the injustice of the 
magistrates. 

9 G. A. Real. Before this, several instructions from the Ministry of the 
Interior had stressed the need for providing work for prisoners: 5 
Fructidor Year VI, 3 Messidor Year VIII, 8 Pluviose and 28 Ventdse 
Year IX, 7 Brumaire Year X. Immediately after the codes of 1808 and 
1810, one srill finds new instructions^ 20 October 1811, 8 December 
1812; or again the long order of 1816: ‘It is of the greatest importance 
to keep prisoners occupied as much as possible. One must instil in 
them a desire to work, distinguishing between the fate of those who 
are occupied and that of prisoners who wish to remain idle. The first 
will be better fed and have more comfortable beds than the second.’ 
Melun and Clairvaux were very soon organized into great workshops. 

10 Bonneville, 1846, 6 . Bonneville proposed measures of ‘preparatory 
liberty’, but also of ‘afflictive additions’ or an extension of imprison¬ 
ment if it was shown that ‘the penal prescription, fixed approximately 
according to the probable degree of the prisoner’s obduracy was not 
enough to produce the effect expected of it’. This extension was not to 
exceed one eighth of the original penalty; preparatory liberty could 
begin after three quarters of the sentence had been served (Traiti des 
diverses institutions compUmentaires, 25 iff). 

11 In Gaiette des tribunaux. Cf. also Marquet-Wasselot, 1832, 74-5. 
Lucas notes that minor offenders ‘are generally recruited among the 
urban populations’ and that ‘the majority of those sentenced to hard 
labour come from the agricultural populations’ (Lucas, I, 46-50). 

12 ‘If one treats of the administrative question by abstracting the question 
of buildings, one runs the risk of drawing up principles that are based 
on no reality; whereas, with a sufficient knowledge of administrative 
needs, an architect may accept a particular system of imprisonment 
that theory may have dismissed as Utopian’ (Blouet, i). 

13 ‘The English reveal their genius for mechanics in everything they 
do . .. and they want their buildings to function as a machine subject 
to the action of a single motor’ (Baltard, 18). 
