midst of society without being members of it’, who wage ‘a veritable 
war on all citizens’, and who are in the midst of us ‘in that state that 
one supposes existed before the establishment of civil society’. 
Against them, he demanded the most severe penalties (character¬ 
istically, he expressed surprise that one should be more indulgent 
towards them than to smugglers); he wanted the police to be rein¬ 
forced, the mounted constabulary to hunt them down with the help 
of the population that suffered from their depredations; he demanded 
that these useless and dangerous people should be ‘acquired by the 
state and that they should belong to it as slaves to their masters’; 
and if necessary one should organize collective round-ups in the 
woods to drive them out, and anyone making a capture should be 
paid: ‘A reward of ten pounds is given for anyone who kills a wolf. 
A vagabond is infinitely more dangerous for society’ (Le Trosne, 
1764, 8, 50, 54, 61-2). In 1777 in f^ues sur la justice criminelle, the 
same Le Trosne demanded that the prerogatives of the Crown be 
reduced, that the accused be regarded as innocent until proved 
guilty, that the judge be a just arbiter between them and society, 
that laws be ‘fixed, constant, determined in the most precise way’, 
so that subjects know ‘to what they are exposed’ and that magis¬ 
trates be nothing more than the ‘organ of the law’ (Le Trosne, 1777, 
31, 37, 103-6). For Le Trosne, as for so many others at that time, 
the struggle for the delimitation of the power to punish was articu¬ 
lated directly on the need to subject popular illegality to a stricter 
and more constant control. It is understandable that the criticism 


88 




Generalized punishment 


of the public execution should have assumed such importance in 
penal reform: for it was the form in which, in the most visible way, 
the unlimited power of the sovereign and the ever-active illegality 
of the people came together. Humanity in the sentences was the 
rule given to a system of punishment that must fix their limits on 
both. The ‘man’ that must be respected in the sentence was the 
juridical and moral form given to this double delimitation. 

But, although it is true that reform, as a penal theory and as a 
strategy of the power to punish, took shape at the point of coinci¬ 
dence of these two objectives, its stability in the future was due to 
the fact that, for a long time, priority was given to the second. It was 
because the pressure on popular illegalities had become, at the period 
of the Revolution, then under the Empire, and finally throughout 
the nineteenth century, an essential imperative, that reform was able 
to pass from the project stage to that of an institution and set of 
practices. That is to say, although the new criminal legislation 
appears to be characterized by less severe penalties, a clearer codi¬ 
fication, a marked diminution of the arbitrary, a more generally 
accepted consensus concerning the power to punish (in the absence 
of a more real division in its exercise), it is sustained in reality by an 
upheaval in the traditional economy of illegalities and a rigorous 
application of force to maintain their new adjustment. A penal sys¬ 
tem must be confceived as a mechanism intended to administer 
illegalities differentially, not to eliminate them all. 

Shift the object and change the scale. Define new tactics in order 
to reach a target that is now more subtle but also more widely spread 
in the social body. Find new techniques for adjusting punishment to 
it and for adapting its effects. Lay down new principles for regulariz¬ 
ing, refining, universalizing the art of punishing. Homogenize its 
application. Reduce its economic and political cost by increasing its 
effectiveness and by multiplying its circuits. In short, constitute a 
new economy and a new technology of the power to punish: these 
are no doubt the essential raisons d’etre of penal reform in the 
eighteenth century. 

At the level of principles, this new strategy falls easily into the 
general theory of the contract. The citizen is presumed to have 
accepted once and for all, with the laws of society, the very law by 


89 



Punishment 


which he may be punished. Thus the criminal appears as a juridically 
paradoxical being. He has broken the pact, he is therefore the enemy 
of society as a whole, but he participates in the punishment that is 
practised upon him. The least crime attacks the whole of society; 
and the whole of society - including the criminal - is present in the 
least punishment. Penal punishment is therefore a generalized 
function, coextensive with the function of the social body and with 
each of its elements. This gives rise to the problem of the degree of 
punishment, the economy of the power to punish. 

In effect the offence opposes an individual to the entire social 
body; in order to punish him, society has the right to oppose him 
in its entirety. It is an unequal struggle: on one side are all the forces, 
all the power, all the rights. And this is how it should be, since the 
defence of each individual is involved. Thus a formidable right to 
punish is established, since the offender becomes the common 
