placed between two who are well behaved and serious, a libertine 
either alone or between two pious pupils’.® 


147 




Discipline 


In organizing ‘cells’, ‘places’ and ‘ranks’, the disciplines create 
complex spaces that are at once architectural, functional and hier¬ 
archical. It is spaces that provide fixed positions and permit circula¬ 
tion; they carve out individual segments and establish operational 
links; they mark places and indicate values; they guarantee the 
obedience of individuals, but also a better economy of time and 
gesture. They are mixed spaces: real because they govern the dis¬ 
position of buildings, rooms, furniture, but also ideal, because they 
are projected over this arrangement of characterizations, assessments, 
hierarchies. The first of the great operations of discipline is, there¬ 
fore, the constitution of ‘tableaux vivants’, which transform the 
confused, useless or dangerous multitudes into ordered multiplici¬ 
ties. The drawing up of ‘tables’ was one of the great problems of the 
scientific, political and economic technology of the eighteenth 
century: how one was to arrange botanical and zoological gardens, 
and construct at the same time rational classifications of living beings; 
how one was to observe, supervise, regularize the circulation of 
commodities and money and thus build up an economic table that 
might serve as the principle of the increase of wealth; how one was 
to inspect men, observe their presence and absence and constitute 
a general and permanent register of the armed forces; how one was 
to distribute patients, separate them from one another, divide up 
the hospital space and make a systematic classification of diseases: 
these were all twin operations in which the two elements - distribu¬ 
tion and analysis, supervision and intelligibility - are inextricably 
bound up. In the eighteenth century, the table was both a technique 
of power and a procedure of knowledge. It was a question of 
organizing the multiple, of providing oneself with an instrument to 
cover it and to master it; it was a question of imposing upon it an 
‘order’. Like the army general of whom Guibert spoke, the natural¬ 
ist, the physician, the economist was ‘blinded by the immensity, 

dazed by the multitude_the innumerable combinations that result 

from the multiplicity of objects, so many concerns together form a 
burden above his strength. In perfecting itself, in approaching true 
principles, the science of modern warfare might become simpler and 
less difficult’; armies ‘with simple, similar tactics, capable of being 
adapted to every movement... would be easier to move and lead’ 
(Guibert, xxxvi). Tactics, the spatial ordering of men; taxonomy. 


148 




Docile bodies 


the disciplinary space of natural beings; the economic table, the 
regulated movement of wealth. 

But the table does not have the same function in these different 
registers. In the order of the economy, it makes possible the 
measurement of quantities and the analysis of movements. In the 
form of taxonomy, it has the function of characterizing (and con¬ 
sequently reducing individual singularities) and constituting classes 
(and therefore of excluding considerations of number). But in the 
form of the disciplinary distribution, on the other hand, the table 
has the function of treating multiplicity itself, distributing it and 
deriving from it as many effects as possible. Whereas natural 
taxonomy is situated on the axis that links character and category, 
disciplinary tactics is situated on the axis that links the singular and 
the multiple. It allows both the characterization of the individual 
as individual and the ordering of a given multiplicity. It is the first 
condition for the control and use of an ensemble of distinct elements: 
the base for a micro-physics of what might be called a ‘cellular’ 
power. 


The control of activity 

I. The time-table is an old inheritance. The strict model was no 
doubt suggested by the monastic communities. It soon spread. Its 
three great methods - establish rhythms, impose particular occupa¬ 
tions, regulate the cycles of repetition — were soon to be found in 
schools, workshops and hospitals. The new disciplines had no diffi¬ 
culty in taking up their place in the old forms; the schools and poor- 
houses extended the life and the regularity of the monastic com¬ 
munities to which they were often attached. The rigours of the 
industrial period long retained a religious air; in the seventeenth 
century, the regulations of the great manufactories laid down the 
exercises that would divide up the working day: ‘On arrival in the 
morning, before beginning their work, all persons shall wash their 
hands, offer up their work to God and make the sign of the cross’ 
(Saint-Maur, article i); but even in the nineteenth century, when the 
rural populations were needed in industry, they were sometimes 
