normalization. And yet, in the formation and growth of psychology, 
the appearance of these professionals of discipline, normality and 
subjection surely marks the beginning of a new stage. It will be said 
that the quantitative assessment of sensorial responses could at least 
derive authority from the prestige of the emerging science of 
physiology and that for this alone it deserves to feature in the 
history of the sciences. But the supervision of normality was firmly 
encased in a medicine or a psychiatry that provided it with a sort 
of ‘scientificity’; it was supported by a judicial apparatus which, 
directly or indirectly, gave it legal justification. Thus, in the shelter 
of these two considerable protectors, and, indeed, acting as a link 
between them, or a place of exchange, a carefully worked out 
technique for the supervision of norms has continued to develop 
right up to the present day. The specific, institutional supports of 
these methods have proliferated since the founding of the small 
school at Mettray; their apparatuses have increased in quantity and 
scope; their auxiliary services have increased, with hospitals, schools, 
public administrations and private enterprises; their agents have 
proliferated in number, in power, in technical qualification; the 
technicians of indiscipline have founded a family. In the normaliza¬ 
tion of the power of normalization, in the arrangement of a power- 
knowledge over individuals, Mettray and its school marked a new 
era. 

But why choose this moment as the point of emergence of the 
formation of an art of punishing that is still more or less our own.^ 
Precisely because this choice is somewhat ‘unjust’. Because it 
situates the ‘end’ of the process in the lower reaches of criminal law. 
Because Mettray was a prison, but not entirely; a prison in that it 
contained young delinquents condemned by the courts; and yet 
something else, too, because it also contained minors who had been 
charged, but acquitted under article 66 of the code, and boarders 
held, as in the eighteenth century, as an alternative to paternal 
correction. Mettray, a punitive model, is at the limit of strict 


296 



The carceral 


penality. It was the most famous of a whole series of institutions 
which, well beyond the frontiers of criminal law, constituted what 
one might call the carceral archipelago. 

Yet the general principles, the great codes and subsequent legisla¬ 
tion were quite clear on the matter: no imprisonment ‘outside the 
law’, no detention that had not been decided by a qualified judicial 
institution, no more of those arbitrary and yet widespread confine¬ 
ments. Yet the very principle of extra-penal incarceration was in 
fact never abandoned. (A whole study remains to be done of the 
debates that took place during the Revolution concerning family 
courts, paternal correction and the right of parents to lock up their 
children.) And, if the apparatus of the great classical form of con¬ 
finement was partly (and only partly) dismantled, it was very soon 
reactivated, rearranged, developed in certain directions. But what is 
still more important is that it was homogenized, through the media¬ 
tion of the prison, on the one hand with legal punishments and, on 
the other, with disciplinary mechanisms. The frontiers between 
confinement, judicial punishment and institutions of discipline, 
which were already blurred in the classical age, tended to disappear 
and to constitute a great carceral continuum that diffused peniten¬ 
tiary techniques into the most innocent disciplines, transmitting 
disciplinary norms into the very heart of the penal system and 
placing over the slightest illegality, the smallest irregularity, devia¬ 
tion or anomaly, the threat of delinquency. A subtle, graduated 
carceral net, with compact institutions, but also separate and diffused 
methods, assumed responsibility for the arbitrary, widespread, 
badly integrated confinement of the classical age. 

I shall not attempt here to reconstitute the whole network that 
formed first the immediate surroundings of the prison, then spread 
farther and farther outwards. However, a few references and dates 
should give some idea of the breadth and precocity of the phenome¬ 
non. 

There were agricultural sections in the maisons centrales (the first 
example of which was Gaillon in 1824, followed later by Fontevrault, 
Les Douaires, Le Boulard); there were colonies for poor, abandoned 
vagrant children (Petit-Bourg in 1840, Ostwald in 1842); there were 
almshouses for young female offenders who ‘recoiled before the idea 
of entering a life of disorder’, for ‘poor innocent girls whose 


297 



Prison 


mothers’ immorality has exposed to precocious perversity’, or for 
poor girls found on the doorsteps of hospitals and lodging houses. 
There were penal colonies envisaged by the law of 1850: minors, 
acquitted or condemned, were to be sent to these colonies and 
‘brought up in common, under strict discipline, and trained in 
agricultural work and in the principal industries related to it;’ later, 
they were to be joined by minors sentenced to hard labour for life 
