machine: in the absence of the director, his family, his friends, his 
visitors, even his servants (Bentham, 45). Similarly, it does not 
matter what motive animates him: the curiosity of the indiscreet, the 
malice of a child, the thirst for knowledge of a philosopher who 
wishes to visit this museum of human nature, or the perversity of 
those who take pleasure in spying and punishing. The more 
numerous those anonymous and temporary observers are, the greater 
the risk for the inmate of being surprised and the greater his anxious 
awareness of being observed. The Panopticon is a marvellous 
machine which, whatever use one may wish to put it to, produces 
homogeneous effects of power. 

A real subjection is born mechanically from a fictitious relation. 
So it is not necessary to use force to constrain the convict to good 
behaviour, the madman to calm, the worker to work, the schoolboy 
to application, the patient to the observation of the regulations. 
Bentham was surprised that panoptic institutions could be so light: 
there were no more bars, no more chains, no more heavy locks; all 
that was needed was that the separations should be clear and the 
openings well arranged. The heaviness of the old ‘houses of security’, 
with their fortress-like architecture, could be replaced by the simple, 
economic geometry of a ‘house of certainty’. The efficiency of 
power, its constraining force have, in a sense, passed over to the 
other side - to the side of its surface of application. He who is 
subjected to a field of visibility, and who knows it, assumes responsi¬ 
bility for the constraints of power; he makes them play spontane¬ 
ously upon himself; he inscribes in himself the power relation in 


202 




Panoptidsm 


which he simultaneously plays both roles; he becomes the principle 
of his own subjection. By this very fact, the external power may 
throw off its physical weight; it tends to the non-corporal; and, the 
more it approaches this limit, the more constant, profound and 
permanent are its effects; it is a perpetual victory that avoids any 
physical confrontation and which is always decided in advance. 

Bentham does not say whether he was inspired, in his project, by 
Le Vaux’s menagerie at Versailles: the first menagerie in which the 
different elements are not, as they traditionally were, distributed in 
a park (Loisel, 104-7). At the centre was an octagonal pavilion 
which, on the first floor, consisted of only a single room, the king’s 
salon-, on every side large windows looked out onto seven cages 
(the eighth side was reserved for the entrance), containing different 
species of animals. By Bentham’s time, this menagerie had dis¬ 
appeared. But one finds in the programme of the Panopticon a 
similar concern with individualizing observation, with characteriza¬ 
tion and classification, with the analytical arrangement of space. The 
Panopticon is a royal menagerie; the animal is replaced by man, 
individual distribution by specific grouping and the king by the 
machinery of a furtive power. With this exception, the Panopticon 
also does the work of a naturalist. It makes it possible to draw up 
differences: among patients, to observe the symptoms of each indivi¬ 
dual, without the proximity of beds, the circulation of miasmas, the 
effects of contagion confusing the clinical tables; among school- 
children, it makes it possible to observe performances (without 
there being any imitation or copying), to map aptitudes, to assess 
characters, to draw up rigorous classifications and, in relation to 
normal development, to distinguish ‘laziness and stubbornness’ from 
‘incurable imbecility’; among workers, it makes it possible to note 
the aptitudes of each worker, compare the time he takes to perform 
a task, and if they are paid by the day, to calculate their wages 
(Bentham, 60-64). 

, So much for the question of observation. But the Panopticon was 
also a laboratory; it could be used as a machine to carry out experi¬ 
ments, to alter behaviour, to train or correct individuals. To experi¬ 
ment with medicines and monitor their effects. To try out different 
punishments on prisoners, according to their crimes and character, 
and to seek the most effective ones. To teach different techniques 


203 




Discipline 


simultaneously to the workers, to decide which is the best. To try 
out pedagogical experiments - and in particular to take up once 
again the well-debated problem of secluded education, by using 
orphans. One would see what would happen when, in their six¬ 
teenth or eighteenth year, they were presented with other boys or 
girls; one could verify whether, as Helvetius thought, anyone could 
learn anything; one would follow ‘the genealogy of every observable 
idea’; one could bring up different children according to different 
systems of thought, making certain children believe that two and 
two do not make four or that the moon is a cheese, then put them 
together when they are twenty or twenty-five years old; one would 
then have discussions that would be worth a great deal more than 
the sermons or lectures on which so much money is spent; one 
