strikers and rioters, the organization of a sub-police - working 
directly with the legal police and capable if necessary of becoming a 
sort of parallel army - a whole extra-legal functioning of power was 
partly assured by the ^ mass of reserve labour constituted by the 
delinquents: a clandestine police force and standby army at the 
disposal of the state. It seems that, in France, it was around the 
Revolution of 1848 and Louis Napoleon’s seizure of power that 
these practices reached their height (Marx, Eighteenth Brumaire ..., 
63-5). Delinquency, solidified by a penal system centred upon the 
prison, thus represents a diversion of illegality for the illicit circuits 
of profit and power of the dominant class. 

The organization of an isolated illegality, enclosed in delinquency, 
would not have been possible without the development of police 
supervision. General surveillance of the population, ‘silent, mysteri¬ 
ous, unperceived vigilance... it is the eye of the government cease¬ 
lessly open and watching without distinction over ail citizens, yet 
without subjecting them to any measure of coercion whatever... It 
does not need to be written into the law’ (Bonneville, 1847, 397-9). 
Surveillance of individuals, envisaged by the code of 1810, of ex¬ 
convicts and of all those who, having appeared before the courts on 
serious charges, were legally presumed to represent a new threat to 
the peace of society. But surveillance, too, of milieux and groups 


280 




Illegalities and delinquency 


regarded as dangerous by informers, almost all of whom were 
former delinquents, supervised as such by the police: delinquency, 
an object among others of police surveillance, is also one of its 
privileged instruments. All these surveillances presuppose the 
organization of a hierarchy, partly official, partly secret (in the Paris 
police, this was essentially the ‘security service’, which comprised, 
apart from its ‘open agents’ - inspectors and sergeants - its ‘secret 
agents’ and informers, who were motivated by fear of punishment 
or the prospect of reward: cf. Fregier, I, 142-8). They also presup¬ 
pose the setting up of a documentary system, the heart of which 
would be the location and identification of criminals: compulsory 
description of the criminal combined with arrest warrants issued by 
the assize courts, a description included in prison committal registers, 
copies of the registers of assize courts and courts of summary 
jurisdiction sent each month to the Ministries of Justice and of 
General Police, the organization a little later at the Ministry of the 
Interior of a criminal records office with an alphabetical index con¬ 
