gradation of pain: from decapitation (which reduces all pain to a 
single gesture, performed in a single moment - the zero degree of 
torture), through hanging, the stake and the wheel (all of which 
prolong the agony), to quartering, which carries pain almost 
to infinity; death-torture is the art of maintaining life in pain, by 


33 




Torture 


subdividing it into a ‘thousand deaths’, by achieving before life 
ceases ‘the most exquisite agonies’ (cf. Ollyffe). Torture rests on a 
whole quantitative art of pain. But there is more to it: this production 
of pain is regulated. Torture correlates the type of corporal effect, the 
quality, intensity, duration of pain, with the gravity of the crime, 
the person of the criminal, the rank of his victims. There is a legal 
code of pain; when it involves torture, punishment does not fall 
upon the body indiscriminately or equally; it is calculated according 
to detailed rules: the number of lashes of the whip, the positioning 
of the branding iron, the duration of the death agony on the stake 
or the wheel (the court decides whether the criminal is to be 
strangled at once or allowed to die slowly,, and the points at which 
this gesture of pity must occur), the type of mutilation to be used 
(hand cut off, lips or tongue pierced). All these various elements 
multiply the punishments and are combined according to the court 
and the crime. ‘The poetry of Dante put into laws,’ was how Rossi 
described it; a long course in physico-penal knowledge, in any case. 
Furthermore, torture forms part of a ritual. It is an element in the 
liturgy of punishment and meets two demands. It must mark the 
victim: it is intended, either by the scar it leaves on the body, or by 
the spectacle that accompanies it, to brand the victim with infamy; 
even if its function is to ‘purge’ the crime, torture does not recon¬ 
cile; it traces around or, rather, on the very body of the condemned 
man signs that must not be effaced; in any case, men will remember 
public exhibition, the pillory, torture and pain duly observed. And, 
from the point of view of the law that imposes it, public torture and 
execution must be spectacular, it must be seen by all almost as its 
triumph. The very excess of the violence employed is one of the 
elements of its glory: the fact that the guilty man should moan and 
cry out under the blows is not a shameful side-effect, it is the very 
ceremonial of justice being expressed in all its force. Hence no doubt 
those tortures that take place even after death: corpses burnt, ashes 
thrown to the winds, bodies dragged on hurdles and exhibited at 
the roadside. Justice pursues the body beyond all possible pain. 

The term ‘penal torture’ does not cover any corporal punishment: 
it is a differentiated production of pain, an organized ritual for the 
marking of victims and the expression of the power that punishes; 
not the expression of a legal system driven to exasperation and. 


34 




The spectacle of the scaffold 


forgetting its principles, losing all restraint. In the ‘excesses’ of 
torture, a whole economy of power is invested. 

The tortured body is first inscribed in the legal ceremonial that 
must produce, open for all to see, the truth of the crime. 

In France, as in most European countries, with the notable 
exception of England, the entire criminal procedure, right up to the 
sentence, remained secret: that is to say, opaque, not only to the 
public but also to the accused himself. It took place without him, 
or at least without his having any knowledge either of the charges 
or of the evidence. In the order of criminal justice, knowledge was 
the absolute privilege of the prosecution. The preliminary investiga¬ 
tion was carried out ‘as diligently and secretly as may be’, as the edict 
of 1498 put it. According to the ordinance of 1670, which confirmed 
and, on certain points, reinforced the severity of the preceding 
period, it was impossible for the accused to have access to the docu¬ 
ments of the case, impossible to know the identity of his accusers, 
impossible to know the nature of the evidence before objecting to 
witnesses, impossible to make use, until the last moments of the 
trial, of the documents in proof, impossible to have a lawyer, either 
to ensure the proper conduct of the case, or to take part, on the 
main issue, in the defence. The magistrate, for his part, had the 
right to accept anonymous denunciations, to conceal from the ac¬ 
cused the nature of the action, to question him with a view to 
catching him out, to use insinuations. (Up to the eighteenth century, 
lengthy arguments took place as to whether, in the course of 
‘captious’ questioning, it was lawful for the judge to use false 
promises, lies, words with double meaning - a whole casuistry of 
legal bad faith.) The magistrate constituted, in solitary omnipotence, 
a truth by which he invested the accused; and the judges received 
this truth ready made, in the form of documents and written state¬ 
ments; for them, these factors alone were proof; they met the 
accused only once in order to question him before passing sentence. 
The secret and written form of the procedure reflects the principle 
that in criminal matters the establishment of truth was the absolute 
