marked the ‘surplus power’ of the sovereign carrying out his legiti¬ 
mate vengeance; it is a quasi-equivalence at the level of interests: a 
little more interest in avoiding the penalty than in risking the crime. 

The rule of sufficient ideality. If the motive of a crime is the 
advantage expected of it, the effectiveness of the penalty is the dis¬ 
advantage expected of it. This means that the ‘pain’ at the heart of 
punishment is not the actual sensation of pain, but the idea of pain, 
displeasure, inconvenience - the ‘pain’ of the idea of ‘pain’. Punish¬ 
ment has to make use not of the body, but of representation. Or 
rather, if it does make use of the body, it is not so much as the sub¬ 
ject of a pain as the object of a representation: the memory of pain 
must prevent a repetition of the crime, just as the spectacle, how¬ 
ever artificial it may be, of a physical punishment may prevent the 
contagion of a crime. But it is not pain in itself that will be the 
instrument of the technique of punishment. Therefore, as long as 
possible, and except in cases requiring an effective representation, 
one should avoid recourse to the great panoply of the scaffold. 
There is an elision of the body as the subject of the punishment, but 
not necessarily as an element in a spectacle. The rejection of the 
public execution which, at the threshold of the theory, had found 


94 




Generalized punishment 


no more than a lyrical expression, was now offered the possibility 
of a rational articulation: what must be maximized is the representa¬ 
tion of the penalty, not its corporal reality. 

The rule of lateral effects. The penalty must have its most intense 
effects on those who have not committed the crime; to carry the 
argument to its limit, if one could be sure that the criminal could not 
repeat the crime, it would be enough to make others believe that he 
had been punished. There is a centrifugal intensification of effects, 
which leads to the paradox that in the calculation of penalties the 
least important element is still the criminal (unless he is likely to 
repeat the offence). Beccaria illustrated this paradox in the punish¬ 
ment that he proposed to replace the death sentence - perpetual 
slavery. Is this not a physically more cruel punishment than death.’ 
Not at all, he says: because the pain of slavery, for the condemned 
man, is divided into as many portions as he has moments left to live; 
it is an infinitely divisible penalty, an Eleatic penalty, much less 
severe than capital punishment, which is only one step away from 
the public execution. On the other hand, for those who see these 
slaves, or represent them to themselves, the pains they bear are 
concentrated into a single idea; all the moments of slavery are 
contracted into a representation that then becomes more terrifying 
than the idea of death. It is the economically ideal punishment: it 
is minimal for him who undergoes it (and who, reduced to slavery, 
cannot repeat his crime) and it is maximal for him who represents it 
to himself. ‘Among the penalties, and in the way of applying them 
in proportion to the offences, one must choose the means that will 
leave the most lasting impression on the minds of the people, and 
the least cruel on the body of the criminal’ (Beccaria, 87). 

The rule of perfect certainty. With the idea of each crime and the 
advantages to be expected of it must be associated the idea of a 
particular punishment with the precise inconveniences that result 
from it; the link from one to the other must be regarded as necessary 
and unbreakable. This general element of certainty that must give 
the system of punishment its effectiveness involves a number of 
precise measures. The laws that define the crime and lay down the 
penalties must be perfectly clear, ‘so that each member of society 
may distinguish criminal actions from virtuous actions’ (Brissot, 
24). These laws must be published, so that everyone has access to 


95 




Punishment 


them; what is needed is not oral traditions and customs, but a written 
legislation which can be ‘the stable monument of the social pact’, 
printed texts available to all: ‘Only printing can make the public as 
a whole and not just a few persons depositories of the sacred code of 
the laws’ (Beccaria, 26). The monarch must renounce his right of 
pardon so that the force that is present in the idea of punishment 
is not attenuated by the hope of intervention: ‘If one allows men to 
see that the crime may be pardoned and that punishment is not a 
necessary consequence of it, one nourishes in them the hope of 
going unpunished. . . The laws must be inexorable, those who 
execute them inflexible.’® Above all, no crime committed must 
escape the gaze of those whose task it is to dispense justice. Nothing 
so weakens the machinery of the law than the hope of going un¬ 
punished; how could one establish in the minds of the public a strict 
link between the offence and a penalty if it were affected by a certain 
coefficient of improbability.^ Would it not be necessary to make the 
penalty the more to be feared in its violence as it is less to be feared 
in its uncertainty.^ Rather than imitate the old system in this way 
and be ‘more severe, one must be more vigilant’.’" Hence the idea 
