infinite vengeance: French law, in any case, made provisions for no 
fixed penalties for this sort of monstrosity. For the execution of 
Ravaillac the form of the ceremony had to be invented, by combin¬ 
ing all the cruellest tortures then practised in France. For Damiens, 
an attempt was made to think up still more atrocious tortures. 
Suggestions were made, but they were considered to be less perfect. 
So the form of Ravaillac’s execution was repeated. And it must be 
admitted that it was relatively modest if one thinks how in 1584 the 
assassin of William of Orange was abandoned to what seems like an 
infinity of vengeance. ‘On the first day, he was taken to the square 
where he found a cauldron of boiling water, in which was submerged 
the arm with which he had committed the crime. The next day the 
arm was cut off, and, since it fell at his feet, he was constantly 
kicking it up and down the scaffold; on the third day, red-hot 
pincers were applied to his breasts and the front of his arm; on the 
fourth day, the pincers were applied similarly on the back of his 
arm and on his buttocks; and thus, consecutively, this man was 
tortured for eighteen days.’ On the last day, he was put to the wheel 
and 'mailloti' [beaten with a wooden club]. After six hours, he was 
still asking for water, which was not given him. ‘Finally the police 
magistrate was begged to put an end to him by strangling, so that 
his soul should not despair and be lost’ (Brantome, II, 191-2). 

There can be no doubt that the existence of public tortures and 
executions were connected with something quite other than this 
internal organization. Rusche and Kirchheimer are right to see it as 
the effect of a system of production in which labour power, and 
therefore the human body, has neither the utility nor the commercial 
value that are conferred on them in an economy of an industrial 
type. Moreover, this ‘contempt’ for the body is certainly related to 
a general attitude to death; and, in such an attitude, one can detect 
not only the values proper to Christianity, but a demographical. 


54 




The spectacle of the scaffold 


in a sense biological, situation: the ravages of disease and hunger, 
the periodic massacres of the epidemics, the formidable child mor¬ 
tality rate, the precariousness of the bio-economic balances - all this 
made death familiar and gave rise to rituals intended to integrate it, 
to make it acceptable and to give a meaning to its permanent 
aggression. But in analysing why the public executions survived for 
so long, one must also refer to the historical conjuncture; it must 
not be forgotten that the ordinance of 1670 that regulated criminal 
justice almost up to the Revolution had even increased in certain 
respects the rigour of the old edicts; Pussort, who, among the com¬ 
missioners entrusted with the task of drawing up the documents, 
represented the intentions of the king, was responsible for this, 
despite the views of such magistrates as Lamoignon; the number of 
uprisings at the very height of the classical age, the rumbling close 
at hand of civil war, the king’s desire to assert his power at the 
expense of the parlements go a long way to explain the survival of 
so severe a penal system. 

In accounting for a penal system involving so much torture, these 
are general and in a sense external reasons; they explain not only 
the possibility and the long survival of physical punishments, but 
also the weakness and the rather sporadic nature of the opposition 
to them. Against this general background we must bring out their 
precise function. If torture was so strongly embedded in legal 
practice, it was because it revealed truth and showed the operation 
of power. It assured the articulation of the written on the oral, the 
secret on the public, the procedure of investigation on the operation 
of the confession; it made it possible to reproduce the crime on the 
visible body of the criminal; in the same horror, the crime had to 
be manifested and annulled. It also made the body of the condemned 
man the place where the vengeance of the sovereign was applied, 
the anchoring point for a manifestation of power, an opportunity 
of affirming the dissymmetry of forces. We shall see later that the 
truth-power relation remains at the heart of all mechanisms of 
punishment and that it is still to be found in contemporary penal 
practice - but in a quite different form and with very different effects. 
The Enlightenment was soon to condemn public torture and execu¬ 
tion as an ‘atrocity’ - a term that was often used to describe it, but 
without any critical intention, by jurists themselves. Perhaps the 


55 



Torture 


notion of ‘atrocity’ is one of those that best designates the economy 
of the public execution in the old penal practice. To begin with, 
atrocity is a characteristic of some of the great crimes: it refers to the 
number of natural or positive, divine or human laws that they 
attack, to the scandalous openness or, on the contrary, to the secret 
cunning with which they have been committed, to the rank and 
status of those who are their authors and victims, to the disorder 
that they presuppose or bring with them, to the horror they 
arouse. In so far as it must bring the crime before everyone’s eyes, 
in all its severity, the punishment must take responsibility for this 
