
themselves with more furtive operations, with a more modest 
deployment of forces and less risk of bloodshed; ‘The physical 
destruction or institutional dislocation of large gangs ... left the 
field free for an anti-property form of delinquency practised by 
individuals or very small groups of robbers and pickpockets, seldom 
more than four in number’ (Le Roy-Ladurie). A general movement 
shifted criminality from the attack of bodies to the more or less 
direct seizure of goods; and from a ‘mass criminality’ to a ‘marginal 
criminality’, partly the preserve of professionals. It was as if there 
had been a gradual lowering of level - ‘a defusion of the tensions 
that dominate human relations, — a better control of violent 
impulses’^ - and as if the illegal practices had themselves slackened 
their hold on the body and turned to other targets. Crime became 
less violent long before punishment became less severe. But this 
transformation cannot be separated from several underlying pro¬ 
cesses. The first of these, as P. Chaunu observes, was a change in 
the operation of economic pressures, a general rise in the standard 
of living, a large demographic expansion, an increase in wealth and 
property and ‘a consequent need for security’ (Chaunu, 1971, 56). 
Furthermore, throughout the eighteenth century, one can observe a 
certain increased severity in the law: in England, out of the 223 
capital crimes in force at the beginning of the nineteenth century, 
156 had been introduced during the preceding hundred years 
(Buxton, XXXIX); in France, the legislation on vagabondage had 
been revised in the direction of greater severity on several occasions 
since the seventeenth century; a tighter, more meticulous implemen¬ 
tation of the law tended to take account of a mass of minor offences 
that it once allowed to escape more easily: ‘in the eighteenth century, 
the law became slower, heavier, harder on theft, whose relative 
frequency had increased, and towards which it now assumed the 
bourgeois appearances of a class justice’;* the growth in France 
above all, and especially in Paris, of a police apparatus that prevented 
the development of organized, open criminality, shifted it towards 
more discreet forms; to this set of precautions, one should add the 
very widespread belief in a constant and dangerous rise in crime. 
Whereas the historians of today observe a diminution in the great 
gangs of malefactors, Le Trosne saw them roaming the French 
countryside like swarms of locusts: ‘It is these voracious insects who 


76 



Generalized punishment 


daily lay waste the subsistence of the cultivators. They are, quite 
literally, enemy troops spreading over the surface of the territory, 
living as they wish, as in a conquered country, exacting levies under 
the name of alms.’ They cost the poorest peasants more than taxes: 
the richer peasants had to pay anything up to a third of their 
incomes (Le Trosne, 1764,4). Most observers maintained that crime 
was increasing - they included, of course, those who advocated 
sterner measures; they also included those who thought that a law 
that was more restrained in its use of violence would be more 
effective, less liable to retreat before its own consequences (cf., for 
example, Dupaty, 247); and they included the magistrates who 
claimed to be swamped by the number of trials: ‘the misery of the 
people and the corruption of morals have increased the number of 
crimes and convicted criminals’ (one of the judges of the Chambre 
de la Toumelle in an address to the king, 2 August 1768, quoted 
in Farge, 66); in any case, that crime was on the increase was shown 
by the real practice of the courts. ‘The revolutionary and imperial 
era could already be sensed in the last years of the Ancien Regime. 
One is struck, in the trials of 1782-9, by the increase in tension. 
There is a new severity towards the poor, a concerted rejection of 
evidence, a rise in mutual mistrust, hatred and fear’ (Chaunu, 1966, 
108). 

In fact, the shift from a criminality of blood to a criminality of 
fraud forms part of a whole complex mechanism, embracing the 
development of production, the increase of wealth, a higher juridical 
and moral value placed on property relations, stricter methods of 
surveillance, a tighter partitioning of the population, more efficient 
techniques of locating and obtaining information: the shift in illegal 
practices is correlative with an extension and a refinement of puni¬ 
tive practices. 

Was this a general change of attitude, a ‘change that belongs to 
the domain of the spirit and the subconscious’ (the expression is 
Mogensen’s).^ Perhaps, but more certainly and more immediatel} 
it was an effort to adjust the mechanisms of power that frame th< 
everyday lives of individuals; an adaptation and a refinement of thf 
machinery that assumes responsibility for and places under Surveil¬ 
lance their everyday behaviour, their identity, their activity, their 
apparently unimportant gestures; another policy for that multiplicity 


77 



Punishment 


of bodies and forces that constitutes a population. What was emerg¬ 
ing no doubt was not so much a new respect for the humanity of 
the condemned - torture was still frequent in the execution of even 
