it and combine it with others. Similarly, one uses the labour of 
children and of old people in the great workshops; this is because 
they have certain elementary capacities for which it is not necessary 
to use workers who have many other aptitudes; furthermore, they 
constitute a cheap labour force; lastly, if they work, they are no 
longer at anyone’s charge: ‘Labouring mankind’, said a tax collector 
of an enterprise at Angers, ‘may find in this manufactory, from the 
age of ten to old age, resources against idleness and the penury that 
follows from it’ (Marchegay, 360). But it was probably in primary 
education that this adjustment of different chronologies was to be 
carried out with most subtlety. From the seventeenth century to the 
introduction, at the beginning of the nineteenth, of the Lancaster 
method, the complex clockwork of the mutual improvement school 
was built up cog by cog: first the oldest pupils were entrusted with 
tasks involving simple supervision, then of checking work, then of 
teaching; in the end, all the time of all the pupils was occupied either 
with teaching or with being taught. The school became a machine 
for learning, in which each pupil, each level and each moment, if 
correctly combined, were permanently utilized in the general pro¬ 
cess of teaching. One of the great advocates of the mutual improve¬ 
ment schools gives us some idea of this progress: ‘In a school of 360 
children, the master who would like to instruct each pupil in turn 
for a session of three hours would not be able to give half a minute 


165 




Discipline 


to each. By the new method, each of the 360 pupils writes, reads or 
counts for two and a half hours’ (cf. Bernard). 

3. This carefully measured combination of forces requires a 
precise system of command. All the activity of the disciplined 
individual must be punctuated and sustained by injunctions whose 
efficacity rests on brevity and clarity; the order does not need to be 
explained or formulated; it must trigger off the required behaviour 
and that is enough. From the master of discipline to him who is 
subjected to it the relation is one of signalization: it is a question not 
of understanding the injunction but of perceiving the signal and 
reacting to it immediately, according to a more or less artificial, 
prearranged code. Place the bodies in a little world of signals to each 
of which is attached a single, obligatory response; it is a technique 
of training, of dressage, that ‘despotically excludes in everything 
the least representation, and the smallest murmur’; the dis¬ 
ciplined soldier ‘begins to obey whatever he is ordered to do; his 
