code given by Joseph II to Austria; and yet both legislations made 
imprisonment - modulated according to its duration and aug¬ 
mented in certain cases by branding or the use of irons - an almost 
uniform penalty: at least thirty years’ detention for an attempt on 
the sovereign’s life, for counterfeiting and for murder with robbery; 
fifteen to thirty years for voluntary homicide or armed robbery; one 
month to five years for simple theft, etc.® 

But if this colonization of the penalty by the prison is surprising, 
it is because imprisonment was not, as one might imagine, a punish¬ 
ment that was already securely established in the penal system, just 
below the death penalty, and which naturally occupied the place left 
vacant by the disappearance of public torture. In fact, imprisonment 


117 




Punishment 


-and on this point many countries were in the same situation as 
France - had only a limited and marginal position in the system of 
penalties. This is shown by the texts themselves. The ordinance of 
1670 does not include detention among the peines afflictives, or 
serious penalties. Perpetual or temporary imprisonment was no 
doubt included among certain local customs and practices (cf., for 
example, Coquille). But contemporary writers maintained that it was 
falling into disuse together with other forms of torture: ‘There were 
formerly penalties that are no longer practised in France, such as 
writing a condemned man’s penalty on his face or forehead and 
perpetual imprisonment, just as one no longer condemns a criminal 
to be exposed to wild beasts or sent down the mines’ (Rousseaud de 
la Combe, 3). In fact, it is certain that imprisonment had survived 
tenaciously as a punishment for less serious offences, according to 
local customs and practices. In this sense, Soulatges spoke of the 
‘light penalties’ that the ordinance of 1670 had not mentioned: 
reprimand, admonition, banishment from a certain place, satisfaction 
to the injured party and a term of imprisonment. In certain regions, 
especially those that had most preserved their legal p>eculiarities, the 
penalty of imprisonment was still widespread, but this had its 
difficulties, as in the recently annexed province of Roussillon. 

Yet, despite these divergencies, jurists held firmly to the principle 
that ‘imprisonment is not to be regarded as a penalty in our civil 
law’ (Serpillon, 1095 - however, one does find in Serpillon the idea 
that the rigour of imprisonment is the beginning of a penalty). Its 
role is rather that of holding the person and his body as security: 
aJ continendos homines, non ad puniendos, as the tag has it; in this 
sense, the imprisonment of a suspect has a role similar to that of a 
debtor. Through imprisonment, one has security for someone, one 
does not punish him.* This was the general principle. And although 
imprisonment sometimes served as a penalty, even in important 
cases, it did so essentially as a substitute: it replaced the galleys for 
those - women, children, invalids - who could not serve there: ‘The 
sentence of imprisonment for a term or for life is equivalent to being 
sent to the galleys.’® In this equivalence, one can see clearly enough 
the emergence of a possible connection. But, for this to take place, 
the prison had to change its juridical status. 

It was also necessary to overcome a second obstacle, which, for 


118 




The gentle way in punishment 


France at least, was a considerable one. Imprisonment was especially 
disqualified for this role by the fact that it was, in practice, directly 
bound up with arbitrary royal decision and the excesses of the 
sovereign power. The 'maisons de force, the general hospitals, the 
‘king’s orders’ or the orders of the police magistrates, letters under 
the king’s private seal obtained by notables or by families, con¬ 
stituted a whole repressive practice, juxtaposed with ‘regular justice’ 
and more usually opposed to it. And this extra-judicial imprison¬ 
ment came to be rejected by both classical jurists and reformers. 
Prisons are made by princes, said a traditionalist like Serpillon, who 
sheltered behind the authority of Judge Bouhier: ‘Although, for 
reasons of state, princes are sometimes inclined to inflict this penalty, 
ordinary justice makes no use of this kind of sentence’ (Serpillon, 
1095). Detention was described by the reformers in innumerable 
statements as a figure and privileged instrument of despotism: ‘What 
is one to say of those secret prisons conjured up by the fatal spirit of 
monarchism, reserved in the main either for philosophers, in whose 
hands nature has placed her torch and who dared to enlighten their 
century, or for those proud independent souls who lack the coward¬ 
ice to keep silent on the ills of their country; prisons whose gloomy 
doors are opened by mysterious letters and swallow up forever its 
unfortunate victims.^ What is to be said even of those letters, those 
masterpieces of ingenious tyranny, which overthrow the privilege 
of every citizen to be heard before he is judged, and which are a 
thousand times more dangerous for men than the invention of 
Phalaris .. .’* (Brissot, 173). 

