obedience is prompt and blind; an appearance of indocility, the least 
delay would be a crime’ (Boussanelle, 2). The training of school- 
children was to be carried out in the same way: few words, no 
explanation, a total silence interrupted only by signals - bells, clap¬ 
ping of hands, gestures, a mere glance from the teacher, or that little 
wooden apparatus used by the Brothers of the Christian Schools; it 
was called par excellence the ‘Signal’ and it contained in its mechanical 
brevity both the technique of command and the morality of obedi¬ 
ence. ‘The first and principal use of the signal is to attract at once 
the attention of all the pupils to the teacher and to make them 
attentive to what he wishes to impart to them. Thus, whenever he 
wishes to attract the attention of the children, and to bring the 
exercise to an end, he will strike the signal once. Whenever a good 
pupil hears the noise of the signal, he will imagine that he is hearing 
the voice of the teacher or rather the voice of God himself calling 
him by his name. He will then partake of the feelings of the young 
Samuel, saying with him in the depths of his soul: “Lord, I am 
here.” ’ The pupil will have to have learnt the code of the signals 
and respond automatically to them. ‘When prayer has been said, 
the teacher will strike the signal at once and, turning to the child 
whom he wishes to read, he will make the sign to begin. To make a 
sign to stop to a pupil who is reading, he will strike the signal 




Docile bodies 


once. . . To make a sign to a pupil to repeat when he has read 
badly or mispronounced a letter, a syllable or a word, he will strike 
the signal twice in rapid succession. If, after the sign had been made 
two or three times, the pupil who is reading does not find and repeat 
the word that he has badly read or mispronounced - because he has 
read several words beyond it before being called to order - the 
teacher will strike three times in rapid succession, as a sign to him to 
begin to read farther back; and he will continue to make the sign 
till the pupil finds the word which he has said incorrectly’ (La Salle, 
Conduite ... 137-8; cf. also Demia, 21). The mutual improvement 
school was to exploit still further this control of behaviour by the 
system of signals to which one had to react immediately. Even 
verbal orders were to function as elements of signalization: ‘Enter 
your benches. At the word enter, the children bring their right 
hands down on the table with a resounding thud and at the same 
time put one leg into the bench; at the words ^our benches they put 
the other leg in and sit down opposite their slates ... Take your 
slates. At the word take, the children, with their right hands, take 
hold of the string by which the slate is suspended from the nail 
before them, and, with their left hands, they grasp the slate in the 
middle; at the word slates, they unhook it and place it on the table’.’® 
To sum up, it might be said that discipline creates out of the 
bodies it controls four types of individuality, or rather an individual¬ 
ity that is endowed with four characteristics: it is cellular (by the 
play of spatial distribution), it is organic (by the coding of activities), 
it is genetic (by the accumulation of time), it is combinatory (by the 
composition of forces). And, in doing so, it operates four great 
techniques; it draws up tables; it prescribes movements; it imposes 
exercises; lastly, in order to obtain the combination of forces, it 
arranges ‘tactics’. Tactics, the art of constructing, with located 
bodies, coded activities and trained aptitudes, mechanisms in which 
the product of the various forces is increased by their calculated 
combination are no doubt the highest form of disciplinary practice. 
In this knowledge, the eighteenth-century theoreticians saw the 
general foundation of all military practice, from the control and 
exercise of individual bodies to the use of forces specific to the most 
complex multiplicities. The architecture, anatomy, mechanics, 
economy of the disciplinary body: ‘In the eyes of most soldiers. 


167 




Discipline 


tactics are only a branch of the vast science of war; for me, they are 
the base of this science; they are this science itself, because they 
teach how to constitute troops, order them, move them, get them to 
fight; because tactics alone may make up for numbers, and handle 
the multitude; lastly, it will include knowledge of men, weapons, 
tensions, circumstances, because it is all these kinds of knowledge 
brought together that must determine those movements’ (Guibert, 
4). Or again: ‘The term tactics ... gives some idea of the respective 
position of the men who make up a particular troop in rela¬ 
tion to that of the different troops that make up an army, their 
movements and their actions, their relations with one another’ (Joly 
de Maizeroy, 2). 

It may be that war as strategy is a continuation of politics. But it 
must not be forgotten that ‘politics’ has been conceived as a con¬ 
tinuation, if not exactly and directly of war, at least of the military 
model as a fundamental means of preventing civil disorder. Politics, 
as a technique of internal peace and order, sought to implement the 
mechanism of the perfect army, of the disciplined mass, of the docile, 
useful troop, of the regiment in camp and in the field, on manoeu¬ 
vres and on exercises. In the great eighteenth-century states, the 
army guaranteed civil peace no doubt because it was a real force, 
an ever-threatening sword, but also because it was a technique and a 
