universality and necessity; to insert the power to punish more deeply 
into the social body. 

The conjuncture that saw the binh of reform is not, therefore, 
that of a new sensibility, but that of another policy with regard to 
illegalities. 

Roughly speaking, one might say that, under the Ancien Regime 
each of the different social strata had its margin of tolerated illega¬ 
lity: the non-application of the rule, the non-observance of the 
innumerable edicts or ordinances were a condition of the political 
and economic functioning of society. This feature may not have 
been peculiar to the Ancien Regime. But illegality was so deeply 
rooted and so necessary to the life of each social stratum, that it had 
in a sense its own coherence and economy. Sometimes it took on an 
absolutely statutory form - as with the privileges accorded certain 
individuals and groups - which made it not so much an illegality 
as a regular exemption. Sometimes it took the form of a massive 
general non-observance, which meant that for decades, sometimes 
for centuries, ordinances could be published and constantly renewed 
without ever being implemented. Sometimes it was a matter of laws 
gradually falling into abeyance, then suddenly being reactivated; 
sometimes of silent consent on the part of the authorities, neglect, or 
quite simply the actual impossibility of imposing the law and appre¬ 
hending offenders. The least-favoured strata of the population did 
not have, in principle, any privileges: but they benefited, within the 
margins of what was imposed on them by law and custom, from a 
space of tolerance, gained by force or obstinacy; and this space was 
for them so indispensable a condition of existence that they were 
often ready to rise up to defend it; the attempts that were made 
periodically to reduce it, by reviving old laws or by improving the 
methods of apprehending, provoked popular disturbances, just as 


82 




Generalized punishment 


attempts to reduce certain privileges disturbed the nobility, the 
clergy and the bourgeoisie. 

This necessary illegality, of which eyery social stratum bore 
within itself specific forms, was caught up in a series of paradoxes. 
In its lower regions, it was identified with criminality, from which 
it was difficult to distinguish it juridically, if not morally: from fiscal 
illegality to customs illegality, to smuggling, to looting, to the 
armed struggle against the government’s taxation agents, then 
against the soldiers themselves and, finally, to rebellion, there was 
a continuity, in which it was difficult to mark the frontiers; or, again, 
vagabondage (severely punished according to the terms of ordin¬ 
ances that were never implemented) with the pillage, aggravated 
theft, even murder that went with it, provided a welcome environ¬ 
ment to the unemployed, to workers who had left their employers 
in irregular circumstances, to domestic servants who had some 
reason to flee their masters, to ill-treated apprentices, to deserting 
soldiers, to all those who wished to escape the press-gang. So 
criminality merged into a wider illegality, to which the lower strata 
were attached as to conditions of existence; and, conversely, this 
illegality was a perpetual factor in the increase of crime. Hence an 
ambiguity in popular attitudes: on the one hand, the criminal - 
especially when he happened to be a smuggler or a peasant who had 
fled from the exactions of a master - benefited from a spontaneous 
wave of sympathy: his acts of violence were seen as descending 
directly from old struggles. On the other hand, a man who, under 
cover of an illegality accepted by the population, committed crimes 
at the expense of this population, the vagrant beggar, for example, 
who robbed and murdered, easily became the object of a special hate: 
he had redirected upon the least favoured illegality that was integral 
to their conditions of existence. Thus there grew up around crimes 
a network of glorification and blame; effective help and fear alter¬ 
nated with regard to this shifting population, which one knew was 
very near, but from which one felt that crime could emerge. 
Popular illegality enveloped a whole nucleus of criminality that was 
both its extreme form and its internal danger. 

Between this illegality of the depths and those of the other social 
castes, there was neither an exact convergence nor a profound opposi¬ 
tion. Generally speaking, the different illegalities proper to each 


83 




Punishment 


group maintained relations with one another that involved not only 
rivalry, competition and conflicts of interest, but also mutual help 
and complicity: the peasants’ refusal to pay certain state or eccle¬ 
siastical rents was not necessarily disapproved of by the landowners; 
the non-application by artisans of manufacturing regulations was 
often encouraged by the new entrepreneurs; smuggling - the story 
of Mandrin, welcomed by the entire population, received in castles 
and protected by parUmentaires proves this - was very widely 
