
Illegaliries and delinquency 


agitation that had always surrounded the public executions now 
found an echo in precise threats. One can see why the July monarchy 
decided to abolish the chain-gang for the same - but more pressing - 
reasons that brought about, in the eighteenth century, the abolition 
of the public executions: ‘It is no part of our morality to treat men 
in this way; one must avoid providing in the towns that the convoy 
passes through so hideous a spectacle, which, in any case, teaches 
the population nothing’ (Gaiette des tribuneaux, 19 July 1836). It 
was necessary, therefore, to break with these public rites; to subject 
the movements of convicts to the same mutation as the punishments 
themselves; and to bring them, too, under the veil of administrative 
decency. 

But what, in June 1837, was adopted to replace the chain-gang was 
not the simple covered cart, which had been suggested at one time, 
but a machine that had been very meticulously designed: a carriage 
conceived as a moving prison, a mobile equivalent of the Panopticon. 
A central corridor divided it along its entire length: on either side 
were six cells in which the two rows of convicts sat facing one 
another. Their feet were placed in rings that were lined on the inside 
with wool and linked together by chains eighteen inches long; the 
legs were secured in metal knee-guards. The convict sat on a kind 
of ‘zinc and oak funnel that emptied onto the public way’. The cell 
had no window onto the outside; it was completely lined with sheet 
iron; only a ventilator, also of sheet-iron, with holes pierced in it, 
allowed a ‘suitable flow of air’. On the corridor side, the door of 
each cell was provided with a hatch, divided into two compartments: 
one for food, the other, covered by a grill, for surveillance. ‘The 
opening and the oblique direction of the hatches were so arranged 
that the warders had the prisoners constantly in view and heard 
every word they spoke, though the prisoners themselves were 
unable to see or hear one another.’ In this way, ‘the same carriage 
may, without the slightest inconvenience, contain at one and the 
same time a convict and a simple offender, men and women, children 
and adults. Whatever the length of the journey, all would be 
brought to their destination without having been able to perceive 
one another or to speak to one another.’ Lastly, the constant sur¬ 
veillance of the two warders, who were each armed with a small oak 
club, ‘with thick nails of crushed diamond’ made it possible to 




Prison 


operate a whole system of punishments in conformity with the 
internal regulation of the carriage: a diet of bread and water, thumb¬ 
screws, lack of a cushion that would allow one to sleep, chains on 
both arms. ‘Any reading other than that of books of morality is 
forbidden.’ 

If only for its mildness and speed, this machine ‘would have done 
honour to the sensibility of its author’; but its merit lay in the fact 
that it was a veritable penitentiary carriage. By its external effects, 
it had a quite Benthamite perfection: ‘In the rapid passage of this 
mobile prison which, on its dark, silent flanks, bears no other 
inscription than the following words - Transport of Convicts - 
there is something mysterious and gloomy, which Bentham requires 
in the carrying out of criminal sentences and which leaves in the 
minds of onlookers a more salutary and lasting impression than the 
sight of those cynical and joyous travellers’ {Gaiette des tribimaux, 
15 June 1837). It also had internal effects; even in a journey lasting 
only a few days (during which the inmates had not been detached 
for a single moment), it functioned as an apparams of correction. 
One emerged from it astonishingly calm: ‘From a moral point of 
view, this transportation, which lasts no more than seventy-two 
hours, is a terrible torture whose effects on the prisoner seem to be 
lasting.’ The convicts themselves support this view: ‘In the cell 
carriage, when you don’t sleep, you can only think. And when I 
thought, I came to regret what I had done; in the end, you see, I 
would have been afraid to mend my ways and I don’t want to.’® 

The panoptic carriage had only a short history. Yet the way in 
which it replaced the chain-gang and the reasons for this replacement 
recapitulated the whole process by which in eighty years penal 
detention replaced public execution as a calculated technique for 
altering individual behaviour. The cell-carriage was an apparatus of 
reform. What replaced the public execution was not a massive 
enclosure, it was a carefully articulated disciplinary mechanism - at 
least in principle. 

For the prison, in its reality and visible effects, was denounced at 
once as the great failure of penal justice. In a very strange way, the 
history of imprisonment does not obey a chronology in which one 
sees, in orderly succession, the establishment of a penality of deten- 


264 




Illegalities and delinquency 


