
And they disappeared as a whole new literature of crime deve¬ 
loped: a literature in which crime is glorified, because it is one of the 
fine arts, because it can be the work only of exceptional natures, 
because it reveals the monstrousness of the strong and powerful, 
because villainy is yet another mode of privilege: from the adventure 
story to de Quincey, or from the Castle of Otranto to Baudelaire, 
there is a whole aesthetic rewriting of crime, which is also the 
appropriation of criminality in acceptable forms. In appearance, it is 
the discovery of the beauty and greatness of crime; in fact, it is the 
affirmation that greatness too has a right to crime and that it even 


68 




The spectacle of the scaffold 


becomes the exclusive privilege of those who are really great. The 
great murders are not for the pedlars of petty crime. While, from 
Gaboriau onwards, the literature of crime follows this first shift: by 
his cunning, his tricks, his sharp-wittedness, the criminal represented 
in this literature has made himself impervious to suspicion; and the 
struggle between two pure minds - the murderer and the detective - 
will constitute the essential form of the confrontation. We are far 
removed indeed from those accounts of the life and misdeeds of the 
criminal in which he admitted his crimes, and which recounted in 
detail the tortures of his execution: we have moved from the 
exposition of the facts or the confession to the slow process of 
discovery; from the execution to the investigation; from the phy¬ 
sical confrontation to the intellectual struggle between criminal and 
investigator. It was not only the broadsheets that disappeared with 
the birth of a literature of crime; the glory of the rustic malefactor 
and his sombre transformation into a hero by the process of torture 
and execution went with them. The man of the people was now 
too simple to be the protagonist of subtle truths. In this new genre, 
there were no more popular heroes or great executions; the criminal 
was wicked, of course, but he was also intelligent; and although he 
was punished, he did not have to suffer. The literature of crime 
transposes to another social class the spectacle that had surrounded 
the criminal. Meanwhile the newspapers took over the task of 
recounting the grey, unheroic details of everyday crime and punish¬ 
ment. The split was complete; the people was robbed of its old 
pride in its crimes; the great murders had become the quiet game of 
the well behaved. 


69 




PART TWO 
Punishment 






I. Generalized punishment 


‘Let penalties be regulated and proportioned to the offences, let the 
death sentence be passed only on those convicted of murder, and 
let the tortures that revolt humanity be abolished.’ Thus, in 1789, 
the chancellery summed up the general position of the petitions 
addressed to the authorities concerning tortures and executions (cf. 
Seligman, and Desjardin, 13-20). Protests against the public execu¬ 
tions proliferated in the second half of the eighteenth century: among 
the philosophers and theoreticians of the law; among lawyers and 
parlementaires; in popular petitions and among the legislators of the 
assemblies. Another form of punishment was needed; the physical 
confrontation between the sovereign and the condemned man must 
end; this hand-to-hand fight between the vengeance of the prince and 
the contained anger of the people, through the mediation of the victim 
and the executioner, must be concluded. Very soon the public execu¬ 
tion became intolerable. On the side of power, where it betrayed 
tyranny, excess, the thirst for revenge, and ‘the cruel pleasure taken 
in punishing’ (Petion de Villeneuve, 641), it was revolting. On the 
side of the victim who, though reduced to despair, was still expected 
to bless ‘heaven and its judges who appeared to have abandoned 
him’ (Boucher d’Argis, 1781, 125), it was shameful. It was, in any 
case, dangerous, in that it provided a support for a confrontation 
between the violence of the king and the violence of the people. It 
was as if the sovereign power did not see, in this emulation of 
atrocity, a challenge that it itself threw down and which might one 
day be taken up: accustomed as it was to ‘seeing blood flow’, the 
people soon learnt that ‘it could be revenged only with blood’ 
(Lachere). In these ceremonies, which were the object of so much 
adverse investment, one sees the intersection of the excess of armed 
justice and the anger of the threatened people. Joseph de Maistre 


73 


