metries and excluding reciprocities. First, because discipline creates 
between individuals a ‘private’ link, which is a relation of constraints 
entirely different from contractual obligation; the acceptance of a 
discipline may be underwritten by contract; the way in which it is 
imposed, the mechanisms it brings into play, the non-reversible 


222 




Panopticism 


subordination of one group of people by another, the ‘surplus’ 
power that is always fixed on the same side, the inequality of posi¬ 
tion of the different ‘parmers’ in relation to the common regulation, 
all these distinguish the disciplinary link from the contractual link, 
and make it possible to distort the contractual link systematically 
from the moment it has as its content a mechanism of discipline. 
We know, for example, how many real procedures undermine the 
legal fiction of the work contract: workshop discipline is not the 
least important. Moreover, whereas the juridical systems define 
juridical subjects according to universal norms, the disciplines 
characterize, classify, specialize; they distribute along a scale, 
around a norm, hierarchize individuals in relation to one another 
and, if necessary, disqualify and invalidate. In any case, in the space 
and during the time in which they exercise their control and bring 
into play the asymmetries of their power, they effect a suspension 
of the law that is never total, but is never annulled either. Regular 
and institutional as it may be, the discipline, in its mechanism, is a 
‘counter-law’. And, although the universal juridicism of modem 
society seems to fix limits on the exercise of power, its universally 
widespread panopticism enables it to operate, on the underside of 
the law, a machinery that is both immense and minute, which sup¬ 
ports, reinforces, multiplies the asymmetry of power and under¬ 
mines the limits that are traced around the law. The minute disci¬ 
plines, the panopticisms of every day may well be below the level 
of emergence of the great apparatuses and the great political 
struggles. But, in the genealogy of modern society, they have been, 
with the class domination that traverses it, the political counterpart 
of the juridical norms according to which power was redistributed. 
Hence, no doubt, the importance that has been given for so long 
to the small techniques of discipline, to those apparently insignificant 
tricks that it has invented, and even to those ‘sciences’ that give it a 
respectable face; hence the fear of abandoning them if one cannot 
find any substitute; hence the affirmation that they are at the very 
foundation of society, and an element in its equilibrium, whereas 
they are a series of mechanisms for unbalancing power relations 
definitively and everywhere; hence the persistence in regarding them 
as the humble, but concrete form of every morality, whereas they 
are a set of physico-political techniques. 


223 


Discipline 


To return to the problem of legal punishments, the prison witli 
all the corrective technology at its disposal is to be resituated at the 
point where the codified power to punish turns into a disciplinary 
power to observe; at the point where the universal punishments of 
the law are applied selectively to certain individuals and always the 
same ones; at the point where the redefinition of the juridical subject 
by the penalty becomes a useful training of the criminal; at the point 
where the law is inverted and passes outside itself, and where the 
counter-law becomes the effective and institutionalized content of 
the juridical forms. What generalizes the power to punish, then, is 
not the universal consciousness of the law in each juridical subject; 
it is the regular extension, the infinitely minute web of panoptic 
techniques. 

3. Taken one by one, most of these techniques have a long 
history behind them. But what was new, in the eighteenth century, 
was that, by being combined and generalized, they attained a level 
at which the formation of knowledge and the increase of power 
regularly reinforce one another in a circular process. At this point, 
the disciplines crossed the ‘technological’ threshold. First the 
hospital, then the school, then, later, the workshop were not sim¬ 
ply ‘reordered’ by the disciplines; they became, thanks to them, 
apparatuses such that any mechanism of objectification could be 
used in them as an instrument of subjection, and any growth of 
power could give rise in them to possible branches of knowledge; 
it was this link, proper to the technological systems, that made 
possible within the disciplinary element the formation of clinical 
medicine, psychiatry, child psychology, educational psychology, 
the rationalization of labour. It is a double process, then: an episte¬ 
mological ‘thaw’ through a refinement of power relations; a 
multiplication of the effects of power through the formation 
and accumulation of new forms of knowledge. 

The extension of the disciplinary methods is inscribed in a broad 
historical process: the development at about the same time of many 
other technologies - agronomical, industrial, economic. But it must 
be recognized that, compared with the mining industries, the 
emerging chemical industries or methods of national accountancy, 
compared with the blast furnaces or the steam engine, panopticism 
