creases the capacity for resistance, etc. The discipline of the work¬ 
shop, while remaining a way of enforcing respect for the regulations 
and authorities, of preventing thefts or losses, tends to increase 
aptitudes, speeds, output and therefore profits; it still exerts a moral 
influence over behaviour, but more and more it treats actions in 
terms of their results, introduces bodies into a machinery, forces into 
an economy. When, in the seventeenth century, the provincial 
schools or the Christian elementary schools were founded, the 
justifications given for them were above all negative: those poor 
who were unable to bring up their children left them ‘in ignorance 
of their obligations: given the difficulties they have in earning a 
living, and themselves having been badly brought up, they are 
unable to communicate a sound upbringing that they themselves 
never had’; this involves three major inconveniences: ignorance of 
God, idleness (with its consequent drunkenness, impurity, larceny, 
brigandage); and the formation of those gangs of beggars, always 
ready to stir up public disorder and ‘virtually to exhaust the funds 
of the Hotel-Dieu’ (Demia, 60-61). Now, at the beginning of the 
Revolution, the end laid down for primary education was to be, 
among other things, to ‘fortify’, to ‘develop the body’, to prepare 


210 



Panopticism 


the child ‘for a future in some mechanical work’, to give him ‘an 
observant eye, a sure hand and prompt habits’ (Talleyrand’s Report 
to the Constituent Assembly, to September 1791, quoted by Leon, 
106). The disciplines function increasingly as techniques for making 
useful individuals. Hence their emergence from a marginal position 
on the confines of society, and detachment from the forms of 
exclusion or expiation, confinement or retreat. Hence the slow 
loosening of their kinship with religious regularities and enclosures. 
Hence also their rooting in the most important, most central and 
most productive sectors of society. They become attached to some 
of the great essential functions: factory production, the transmission 
of knowledge, the diffusion of aptitudes and skills, the war-machine. 
Hence, too, the double tendency one sees developing throughout 
the eighteenth century to increase the number of disciplinary insti¬ 
tutions and to discipline the existing apparatuses. 

2. The swarming of disciplinary mechanisms. While, on the one 
hand, the disciplinary establishments increase, their mechanisms 
have a certain tendency to become ‘de-institutionalized’, to emerge 
from the closed fortresses in which they once functioned and to 
circulate in a ‘free’ state; the massive, compact disciplines are broken 
down into flexible methods of control, which may be transferred 
and adapted. Sometimes the closed apparatuses add to their internal 
and specific function a role of external surveillance, developing 
around themselves a whole margin of lateral controls. Thus the 
Christian School must not simply train docile children; it must also 
make it possible to supervise the parents, to gain information as to 
their way of life, their resources, their piety, their morals. The 
school tends to constitute minute social observatories that penetrate 
even to the adults and exercise regular supervision over them: the 
bad behaviour of the child, or his absence, is a legitimate pretext, 
according to Demia, for one to go and question the neighbours, 
especially if there is any reason to believe that the family will not 
tell the truth; one can then go and question the parents themselves, 
to find out whether they know their catechism and the prayers, 
whether they are determined to root out the vices of their children, 
how many beds there are in the house and what the sleeping arrange¬ 
ments are; the visit may end with the giving of alms, the present of a 
religious picture, or the provision of additional beds (Demia, 39-40). 


211 




Discipline 


Similarly, the hospital is increasingly conceived of as a base for 
the medical observation of the population outside; after the burning 
down of the Hotel-Dieu in 1772, there were several demands that 
the large buildings, so heavy and so disordered, should be replaced 
by a series of smaller hospitals; their function would be to take in 
the sick of the quarter, but also to gather information, to be alert 
to any endemic or epidemic phenomena, to open dispensaries, to 
give advice to the inhabitants and to keep the authorities informed 
of the sanitary state of the region.* 

One also sees the spread of disciplinary procedures, not in the 
form of enclosed Institutions, but as centres of observation dis¬ 
seminated throughout society. Religious groups and charity 
organizations had long played this role of ‘disciplining’ the popula¬ 
tion. From the Counter-Reformation to the philanthropy of the 
July monarchy, initiatives of this type continued to increase; their 
aims were religious (conversion and moralization), economic (aid 
and encouragement to work) or political (the struggle against dis¬ 
content or agitation). One has only to cite by way of example the 
regulations for the charity associations in the Paris parishes. The 
territory to be covered was divided into quarters and cantons and 
the members of the associations divided themselves up along the 
