forces and bodies, in short, ‘political anatomy’, could be operated 
in the most diverse political regimes, apparatuses or institutions. 

2. The panoptic modality of power - at the elementary, tech¬ 
nical, merely physical level at which it is situated - is not under 
the immediate dependence or a direct extension of the great 


221 




Discipline 


juridico-political structures of a society; it is nonetheless not 
absolutely independent. Historically, the process by which the 
bourgeoisie became in the course of the eighteenth century the politi¬ 
cally dominant class was masked by the establishment of an explicit, 
coded and formally egalitarian juridical framework, made possible 
by the organization of a parliamentary, representative regime. But 
the development and generalization of disciplinary mechanisms 
constituted the other, dark side of these processes. The general 
juridical form that guaranteed a system of rights that were egali¬ 
tarian in principle was supported by these tiny, everyday, physical 
mechanisms, by all those systems of micro-power that are essentially 
non-egalitarian and asymmetrical that we call the disciplines. And 
although, in a formal way, the representative regime makes it pos¬ 
sible, directly or indirectly, with or without relays, for the will of 
all to form the fundamental authority of sovereignty, the disciplines 
provide, at the base, a guarantee of the submission of forces and 
bodies. The real, corporal disciplines constituted the foundation of 
the formal, juridical liberties. The contract may have been regarded 
as the ideal foundation of law and political power; panopticism 
constituted the technique, universally widespread, of coercion. 
It continued to work in depth on the juridical structures of society, 
in order to make the effective mechanisms of power function in 
opposition to the formal framework that it had acquired. The 
‘Enlightenment’, which discovered the liberties, also invented the 
disciplines. 

In appearance, the disciplines constitute nothing more than an 
infra-law. They seem to extend the general forms defined by law to 
the infinitesimal level of individual lives; or they appear as methods 
of training that enable individuals to become integrated into these 
general demands. They seem to constitute the same type of law on 
a different scale, thereby making it more meticulous and more 
indulgent. The disciplines should be regarded as a sort of counter¬ 
law. They have the precise role of introducing insuperable asym¬ 
