registered in this way were forms of behaviour, attitudes, possibili¬ 
ties, suspicions - a permanent account of individuals’ behaviour. 

Now, it should be noted that, although this police supervision 
was entirely ‘in the hands of the king’, it did not function in a single 
direction. It was in fact a double-entry system: it had to correspond, 
by manipulating the machinery of justice, to the immediate wishes 
of the king, but it was also capable of responding to solicitations 
from below; the celebrated lettres de cachet, or orders under the 
king’s private seal, which were long the symbol of arbitrary royal 
rule and which brought detention into disrepute on political 
grounds, were in fact demanded by families, masters, local notables, 
neighbours, parish priests; and their function was to punish by 
confinement a whole infra-penality, that of disorder, agitation, dis¬ 
obedience, bad conduct; those things that Ledoux wanted to exclude 
from his architecturally perfect city and which he called ‘offences of 
non-surveillance’. In short, the eighteenth-century police added a 


214 




Panopticism 


disciplinary function to its role as the auxiliary of justice in the 
pursuit of criminals and as an instrument for the political supervision 
of plots, opposition movements or revolts. It was a complex func¬ 
tion since it linked the absolute power of the monarch to the lowest 
levels of power disseminated in society; since, between these differ¬ 
ent, enclosed institutions of discipline (workshops, armies, schools), 
it extended an intermediary network, acting where they could not 
intervene, disciplining the non-disciplinary spaces; but it filled in 
the gaps, linked them together, guaranteed with its armed force an 
interstitial discipline and a meta-discipline. ‘By means of a wise 
police, the sovereign accustoms the people to order and obedience’ 
(Vattel, 162). 

The organization of the police apparatus in the eighteenth century 
sanctioned a generalization of the disciplines that became co-exten- 
sive with the state itself. Although it was linked in the most explicit 
way with everything in the royal power that exceeded the exercise 
of regular justice, it is understandable why the police offered such 
slight resistance to the rearrangement of the judicial power; and why 
it has not ceased to impose its prerogatives upon it, with ever- 
increasing weight, right up to the present day; this is no doubt 
because it is the secular arm of the judiciary; but it is also because, 
to a far greater degree than the judicial institution, it is identified, 
by reason of its extent and mechanisms, with a society of the 
disciplinary type. Yet it would be wrong to believe that the dis¬ 
ciplinary functions were confiscated and absorbed once and for all 
by a state apparatus. 

‘Discipline’ may be identified neither with an institution nor with 
an apparatus; it is a type of power, a modality for its exercise, com¬ 
prising a whole set of instruments, techniques, procedures, levels of 
application, targets; it is a ‘physics’ or an ‘anatomy’ of power, a 
technology. And it may be taken over either by ‘specialized’ institu¬ 
tions (the penitentiaries or ‘houses of correction’ of the nineteenth 
centiuy), or by institutions that use it as an essential instrument for a 
particular end (schools, hospitals), or by pre-existing authorities 
that find in it a means of reinforcing or reorganizing their internal 
mechanisms of power (one day we should show how intra-familial 
relations, essentially in the parents-children cell, have become ‘disci¬ 
plined’, absorbing since the classical age external schemata, first 




Discipline 


educational and military, then medical, psychiatric, psychological, 
which have made the family the privileged locus of emergence for 
the disciplinary question of the normal and the abnormal); or by 
apparatuses that have made discipline their principle of internal 
functioning (the disciplinarization of the administrative apparatus 
from the Napoleonic period), or finally by state apparatuses whose 
major, if not exclusive, function is to assure that discipline reigns 
over society as a whole (the police). 

On the whole, therefore, one can speak of the formation of a 
disciplinary society in this movement that stretches from the 
enclosed disciplines, a sort of social ‘quarantine’, to an indefinitely 
generalizable mechanism of ‘panopticism’. Not because the disci¬ 
plinary modality of power has replaced all the others; but because 
it has infiltrated the others, sometimes undermining them, but 
serving as an intermediary between them, linking them together, 
extending them and above all making it possible to bring the effects 
of power to the most minute and distant elements. It assures an 
infinitesimal distribution of the power relations. 

A few years after Bentham, Julius gave this society its birth 
certificate (Julius, 384-6). Speaking of the panoptic principle, he 
said that there was much more there than architectural ingenuity: 
it was an event in the ‘history of the human mind’. In appearance, 
it is merely the solution of a technical problem; but, through it, a 
whole type of society emerges. Antiquity had been a civilization of 
