institution, no more of those arbitrary and yet widespread confine¬ 
ments. Yet the very principle of extra-penal incarceration was in 
fact never abandoned. (A whole study remains to be done of the 
debates that took place during the Revolution concerning family 
courts, paternal correction and the right of parents to lock up their 
children.) And, if the apparatus of the great classical form of con¬ 
finement was partly (and only partly) dismantled, it was very soon 
reactivated, rearranged, developed in certain directions. But what is 
still more important is that it was homogenized, through the media¬ 
tion of the prison, on the one hand with legal punishments and, on 
the other, with disciplinary mechanisms. The frontiers between 
confinement, judicial punishment and institutions of discipline, 
which were already blurred in the classical age, tended to disappear 
and to constitute a great carceral continuum that diffused peniten¬ 
tiary techniques into the most innocent disciplines, transmitting 
disciplinary norms into the very heart of the penal system and 
placing over the slightest illegality, the smallest irregularity, devia¬ 
tion or anomaly, the threat of delinquency. A subtle, graduated 
carceral net, with compact institutions, but also separate and diffused 
methods, assumed responsibility for the arbitrary, widespread, 
badly integrated confinement of the classical age. 

I shall not attempt here to reconstitute the whole network that 
formed first the immediate surroundings of the prison, then spread 
farther and farther outwards. However, a few references and dates 
should give some idea of the breadth and precocity of the phenome¬ 
non. 

There were agricultural sections in the maisons centrales (the first 
example of which was Gaillon in 1824, followed later by Fontevrault, 
Les Douaires, Le Boulard); there were colonies for poor, abandoned 
vagrant children (Petit-Bourg in 1840, Ostwald in 1842); there were 
almshouses for young female offenders who ‘recoiled before the idea 
of entering a life of disorder’, for ‘poor innocent girls whose 


297 



Prison 


mothers’ immorality has exposed to precocious perversity’, or for 
poor girls found on the doorsteps of hospitals and lodging houses. 
There were penal colonies envisaged by the law of 1850: minors, 
acquitted or condemned, were to be sent to these colonies and 
‘brought up in common, under strict discipline, and trained in 
agricultural work and in the principal industries related to it;’ later, 
they were to be joined by minors sentenced to hard labour for life 
