perceived and judged; and this would be done immediately with no 
other aid than an exact geometry. Among all the reasons for the 
prestige that was accorded in the second half of the eighteenth 
century, to circular architecture, one must no doubt include the fact 
that it expressed a certain political utopia. 

But, the disciplinary gaze did, in fact, need relays. The pyramid 
was able to fulfil, more efficiently than the circle, two requirements: 
to be complete enough to form an uninterrupted network - con¬ 
sequently the possibility of multiplying its levels, and of distributing 
them over the entire surface to be supervised; and yet to be discreet 
enough not to weigh down with an inert mass on the activity to be 
disciplined, and not to act as a brake or an obstacle to it; to be 
integrated into the disciplinary mechanism as a function that in¬ 
creases its possible effects. It had to be broken down into smaller 
elements, but in order to increase its productive function: specify 
the surveillance and make it functional. 

This was the problem of the great workshops and factories, in 
which a new type of surveillance was organized. It was different 
from the one practised in the regimes of the manufactories, which 
had been carried out from the outside by inspectors, entrusted with 
the task of applying the regulations; what was now needed was an 
intense, continuous supervision; it ran right through the labour 
process; it did not bear - or not only - on production (the nature 
and quantity of raw materials, the type of instruments used, the 
dimensions and quality of the products); it also took into account 
the activity of the men, their skill, the way they set about their tasks, 
their promptness, their zeal, their behaviour. But it was also different 
from the domestic supervision of the master present beside his 
workers and apprentices; for it was carried out by clerks, supervisors 
and foremen. As the machinery of production became larger and 
more complex, as the number of workers and the division of labour 
increased, supervision became ever more necessary and more diffi¬ 
cult. It became a special function, which had nevertheless to form 
an integral part of the production process, to run parallel to it 
throughout its entire length. A specialized personnel became indis¬ 
pensable, constantly present and distinct from the workers: ‘In the 
large factory, everything is regulated by the clock. The workers are 


174 



The means of correct training 


treated strictly and harshly. The clerks, who are used to treating 
them with an air of superiority and command, which is really 
