


3. Panopticism 


The following, according to an order published at the end of the 
seventeenth century, were the measures to be taken when the plague 
appeared in a town.^ 

First, a strict spatial partitioning: the closing of the town and its 
outlying districts, a prohibition to leave the town on pain of death, 
the killing of all stray animals; the division of the town into distinct 
quarters, each governed by an intendant. Each street is placed under 
the authority of a syndic, who keeps it under surveillance; if he 
leaves the street, he will be condemned to death. On the appointed 
day, everyone is ordered to stay indoors: it is forbidden to leave 
on pain of death. The syndic himself comes to lock the door of 
each house from the outside; he takes the key with him and hands 
it over to the intendant of the quarter; the intendant keeps it until 
the end of the quarantine. Each family will have made its own 
provisions; but, for bread and wine, small wooden canals are set up 
between the street and the interior of the houses, thus allowing each 
person to receive his ration without communicating with the sup¬ 
pliers and other residents; meat, fish and herbs will be hoisted up 
into the houses with pulleys and baskets. If it is absolutely necessary 
to leave the house, it will be done in turn, avoiding any meeting. 
Only the intendants, syndics and guards will move about the 
streets and also, between the infected houses, from one corpse to 
another, the ‘crows’, who can be left to die: these are ‘people of little 
substance who carry the sick, bury the dead, clean and do many vile 
and abject offices’. It is a segmented, immobile, frozen space. Each 
individual is fixed in his place. And, if he moves, he does so at the 
risk of his life, contagion or punishment. 

Inspection functions ceaselessly. The gaze is alert everywhere: ‘A 
considerable body of militia, commanded by good officers and men 


>95 




Discipline 


of substance’, guards at the gates, at the town hall and in every 
quarter to ensure the prompt obedience of the people and the most 
absolute authority of the magistrates, ‘as also to observe all disorder, 
