
10 Gaiette des tribunaux, 3 December 1829. Cf. also Gaiette des tribunaux, 
19 July 1839; the Ruche populaire, August 184OJ La Fratermti, July- 
August 1847. 

11 This campaign was very vigorous before and after the passing of new 
regulations for the maisons centrales in 1839. The regulations were 
severe (silence, abolition of wine and tobacco, reduction in food) and 
they were followed by revolts. On 3 October 1840, Le Moruteur 
wrote: ‘It was scandalous to see prisoners gorging themselves with 
wine, meat, game, delicacies of all kinds and treating prison as a 
convenient hostelry where they could procure all the comforts that 
the state of liberty often refused them.’ 

12 In 1826, many of the General Councils demanded that deportation be 
substituted for constant and ineffective incarceration. In 1842, the 
General Council of the Hautes-Alpes demanded that the prisons 
become ‘truly expiatory’; those of Drome, Eure-et-Loir, Ni^vre, 
Rhone and Seine-et-Oise made similar demands. 


321 


Notes 


13 According to an investigation carried out in 1839 among the directors 
of the maisons centrales. The director of the maison centrale of Embrun 
remarked: ‘The excessive comfort in the prisons probably contributes 
a great deal to the terrible increase in the number of recidivists.’ While 
the director at Eysses remarked; ‘The present regime is not severe 
enough, and if one thing is certain it is that for many of the inmates 
prison has its attractions and that they find in prison depraved pleasures 
that are entirely to their liking.’ The director at Limoges: ‘The 
present regime of the maisons centrales which, for the recidivists, are in 
fact little more than boarding houses, is in no way repressive’ (Cf. 
Moreau-Christophe, 1840, 86). Compare these remarks with declara¬ 
tions made, in July 1974, by the leaders of the union of prison workers 
concerning the effects of liberalization in prisons. 

14 On the problem of deportation, cf. Barbe-Marbois and the discussion 
between Blosseville and La Pilorgerie (on the subject of Botany Bay). 
Bure, Marengo and L. de Carn6, among others, drew up plans for the 
colonization of Algeria with delinquents. 

15 One of the first episodes was the organization under police supervision 
of the maisons de tolerance (1823), which went well beyond the pro¬ 
visions of the law of 14 July 1791, concerning surveillance in brothels. 
Cf. on this subject the manuscripts collected by the Prefecture of 
police (20-26). In particular, the following circular from the Prefect of 
police, dated 14 June 1823: ‘The establishment of houses of prostitu¬ 
tion ought naturally to be regarded with displeasure by any man who 
is concerned with public morality; I am not surprised that the Com¬ 
missioners of police oppose to the utmost of their powers the estab¬ 
lishment of houses in their various quarters. . . The police believed 
that they had done much towards public order if they had succeeded 
in enclosing prostitution within tolerated houses over which its action 
may be constant and uniform and which would not be able to escape 
surveillance.’ 

16 The book by Parent-Duchatelet on Prostitution a Paris, 1836, may be 
read as evidence of this link, encouraged by the police and penal 
institutions, between the delinquent milieu and prostitution. The case 
of the Italian Mafia transplanted to the United States and used both to 
extract illicit profits and for political ends is a fine example of the 
colonization of an illegality of popular origin. 

17 On this role of delinquents for police and especially political surveil¬ 
lance, cf. the memorandum written by Lemaire; ‘Informers’ are people 
who ‘expect indulgence for themselves’; they are usually ‘bad subjects 
who expose others who are worse still. Furthermore, it is enough for 


322 



Notes 


someone to have his name in the police register for him never to be 
lost sight of.’ 

18 Of the resistance of lawyers to participating in this functioning, there 
is abundant evidence from as early as the Restoration (which proves 
that it is in no way a recent phenomenon). In particular the liquidation 
or rather the re-utilization of the Napoleonic police posed certain 
problems. But the difficulties continued. Cf. Belleyme’s first speech 
after his appointment in 1825, in which he sought to differentiate 
himself from his predecessors: ‘Legal ways are open to us... Brought 
up in the school of law, educated in the school of so worthy a magis- 
trature ... we are the auxiliaries of justice ...’ (Belleyme)^ see also the 
very interesting pamphlet by Molene, De la libeni. 

19 For contemporary views of Lacenaire, see the dossier drawn up by 
M. Lebailly in his edition of Lacenaire’s Memoires, 1968, 297-304. 

20 The circle of the years 1835-6: Fieschi, who served the penalty com¬ 
mon to parricides and regicides, was one of the reasons why Riviere, 
