respect for the rights of the individual; it is a direct reply to the 
person who has oflFended him. There can be no doubt that ‘the 
exercise of the sovereign power in the punishment of crime is one 
of the essential parts of the administration of justice’ (Jousse, vii). 
Punishment, therefore, cannot be identified with or even measured 
by the redress of the injury; in punishment, there must always be a 
portion that belongs to the prince, and, even when it is combined 
with the redress laid down, it constitutes the most important element 
in the penal liquidation of the crime. Now, this portion belonging 
to the prince is not in itself simple: on the one hand, it requires 
redress for the injury that has been done to his kingdom (as an 
element of disorder and as an example given to others, this con¬ 
siderable injury is out of all proportion to that which has been 
committed upon a private individual); but it also requires that the 
king take revenge for an affront to his very person. 

The right to punish, therefore, is an aspect of the sovereign’s 
right to make war on his enemies: to punish belongs to ‘that 
absolute power of life and death which Roman law calls merum 
imperium, a right by virtue of which the prince sees that his law is 
respected by ordering the punishment of crime’ (Muyart de Vou- 
glans, xxxiv). But punishment is also a way of exacting retribution 
that is both personal and public, since the physico-political force 
of the sovereign is in a sense present in the law: ‘One sees by the 
very definition of the law that it tends not only to prohibit, but also 
to avenge contempt for its authority by the punishment of those who 
violate its prohibitions’ (Muyart de Vouglans, xxxiv). In the execu¬ 
tion of the most ordinary penalty, in the most punctilious respect of 
legal forms, reign the active forces of revenge. 

The public execution, then, has a juridico-political function. It is 
a ceremonial by which a momentarily injured sovereignty is recon¬ 
stituted. It restores that sovereignty by manifesting it at its most 
spectacular. The public execution, however hasty and everyday, 
belongs to a whole series of great rituals in which power is eclipsed 
and restored (coronation, entry of the king into a conquered city, 
the submission of rebellious subjects); over and above the crime 
that has placed the sovereign in contempt, it deploys before all eyes 
an invincible force. Its aim is not so much to re-establish a balance 


48 




The spectacle of the scaffold 


as to bring into play, as its extreme point, the dissymmetry between 
the subject who has dared to violate the law and the all-powerful 
sovereign who displays his strength. Although redress of the private 
injury occasioned by the offence must be proportionate, although the 
sentence must be equitable, the punishment is carried out in such a 
way as to give a spectacle not of measure, but of imbalance and 
excess; in this liturgy of punishment, there must be an emphatic 
affirmation of power and of its intrinsic superiority. And this superi¬ 
ority is not simply that of right, but that of the physical strength 
of the sovereign beating down upon the body of his adversary and 
mastering it: by breaking the law, the offender has touched the very 
person of the prince; and it is the prince - or at least those to whom 
he has delegated his force - who seizes upon the body of the con¬ 
demned man and displays it marked, beaten, broken. The ceremony 
of punishment, then, is an exercise of ‘terror’. When the jurists of 
the eighteenth century began their polemic with the reformers, they 
offered a restrictive, ‘modernist’ interpretation of the physical 
cruelty of the penalties imposed by the law: if severe penalties are 
required, it is because their example must be deeply inscribed in the 
hearts of men. Yet, in fact, what had hitherto maintained this 
practice of torture was not an economy of example, in the sense in 
which it was to be understood at the time of the idiologues (that the 
representation of the penalty should be greater than the interest of 
the crime), but a policy of terror: to make everyone aware, through 
the body of the criminal, of the unrestrained presence of the sover¬ 
eign. The public execution did not re-establish justice; it reactivated 
power. In the seventeenth century, and even in the early eighteenth 
century, it was not, therefore, with all its theatre of terror, a linger¬ 
ing hang-over from an earlier age. Its ruthlessness, its spectacle, its 
physical violence, its unbalanced play of forces, its meticulous 
ceremonial, its entire apparatus were inscribed in the political 
functioning of the penal system. 

This enables us to understand some of the characteristics of the 
liturgy of torture and execution - above all, the importance of a 
ritual that was to deploy its pomp in public. Nothing was to be 
hidden of this triumph of the law. Its episodes were traditionally the 
same and yet the sentences never failed to list them, so important 
were they in the penal mechanism: processions, halts at crossroads 


49 




Torture 


and church doors, the public reading of the sentence, kneeling, 
declarations of repentance for the offence to God and to the king. 
