(the eighth side was reserved for the entrance), containing different 
species of animals. By Bentham’s time, this menagerie had dis¬ 
appeared. But one finds in the programme of the Panopticon a 
similar concern with individualizing observation, with characteriza¬ 
tion and classification, with the analytical arrangement of space. The 
Panopticon is a royal menagerie; the animal is replaced by man, 
individual distribution by specific grouping and the king by the 
machinery of a furtive power. With this exception, the Panopticon 
also does the work of a naturalist. It makes it possible to draw up 
differences: among patients, to observe the symptoms of each indivi¬ 
dual, without the proximity of beds, the circulation of miasmas, the 
effects of contagion confusing the clinical tables; among school- 
children, it makes it possible to observe performances (without 
there being any imitation or copying), to map aptitudes, to assess 
characters, to draw up rigorous classifications and, in relation to 
normal development, to distinguish ‘laziness and stubbornness’ from 
‘incurable imbecility’; among workers, it makes it possible to note 
the aptitudes of each worker, compare the time he takes to perform 
a task, and if they are paid by the day, to calculate their wages 
(Bentham, 60-64). 

, So much for the question of observation. But the Panopticon was 
also a laboratory; it could be used as a machine to carry out experi¬ 
ments, to alter behaviour, to train or correct individuals. To experi¬ 
ment with medicines and monitor their effects. To try out different 
punishments on prisoners, according to their crimes and character, 
and to seek the most effective ones. To teach different techniques 


203 




Discipline 


simultaneously to the workers, to decide which is the best. To try 
out pedagogical experiments - and in particular to take up once 
again the well-debated problem of secluded education, by using 
orphans. One would see what would happen when, in their six¬ 
teenth or eighteenth year, they were presented with other boys or 
girls; one could verify whether, as Helvetius thought, anyone could 
learn anything; one would follow ‘the genealogy of every observable 
idea’; one could bring up different children according to different 
systems of thought, making certain children believe that two and 
two do not make four or that the moon is a cheese, then put them 
together when they are twenty or twenty-five years old; one would 
then have discussions that would be worth a great deal more than 
the sermons or lectures on which so much money is spent; one 
