In any case, the small temporal continuum of individuality- 
genesis certainly seems to be, like the individuality-cell or the 
individuality-organism, an effect and an object of discipline. And, at 
the centre of this seriation of time, one finds a procedure that is, for 
it, what the drawing up of ‘tables’ was for the distribution of 
individuals and cellular segmentation, or, again, what 'manoeuvre’ 
was for the economy of activities and organic control. This proce¬ 
dure is ‘exercise’. Exercise is that technique by which one imposes 
on the body tasks that are both repetitive and different, but always 
graduated. By bending behaviour towards a terminal state, exercise 
makes possible a perpetual characterization of the individual either 
in relation to this term, in relation to other individuals, or in relation 
to a type of itinerary. It thus assures, in the form of continuity and 
constraint, a growth, an observation, a qualification. Before adopt¬ 
ing this strictly disciplinary form, exercise had a long history: it is 
to be found in military, religious and university practices either as 
initiation ritual, preparatory ceremony, theatrical rehearsal or 
examination. Its linear, continuously progressive organization, its 
genetic development in time were, at least in the army and the 
school, introduced at a later date - and were no doubt of religious 
origin. In any case, the idea of an educational ‘programme’ that 
would follow the child to the end of his schooling and which would 
involve from year to year, month to month, exercises of increasing 
complexity, first appeared, it seems, in a religious group, the 
Brothers of the Common Life (cf. Meir, i6o ff). Strongly inspired 
by Ruysbroek and Rhenish mysticism, they transposed certain of 
the spiritual techniques to education - and to the education not only 
of clerks, but also of magistrates and merchants: the theme of a per¬ 
fection towards which the exemplary master guides the pupil became 
with them that of an authoritarian perfection of the pupils by the 
teacher; the ever-increasing rigorous exercises that the ascetic life 
proposed became tasks of increasing complexity that marked the 
gradual acquisition of knowledge and good behaviour; the striving 



Discipline 


of the whole community towards salvation became the collective, 
permanent competition of individuals being classified in relation to 
one another. Perhaps it was these procedures of community life and 
salvation that were the first nucleus of methods intended to produce 
individually characterized, but collectively useful aptitudes.® In its 
mystical or ascetic form, exercise was a way of ordering earthly time 
for the conquest of salvation. It was gradually, in the history of the 
West, to change direction while preserving certain of its character¬ 
istics; it served to economize the time of life, to accumulate it in a 
useful form and to exercise power over men through the mediation 
of time arranged in this way. Exercise, having become an element 
