are to their disadvantage and show that they no longer deserve the 
rewards and prerogatives of the higher classes. . .’ The penal 
classification should tend to disappear. The ‘shameful’ class existed 
only to disappear: ‘In order to judge the kind of conversion 
undergone by pupils of the shameful class who behave well’, they 
were reintroduced into the other classes, and given back their 
uniforms; but they would remain with their comrades in infamy 
during meals and recreation; they would remain there if they did not 
continue to behave well; they ‘would leave it absolutely, if their 
conduct was considered satisfactory both in this class and in this 
division’ (Archives nationales, MM 658,30 March 1758 and MM 66 < 5 , 
15 September 1763). This hierarchizing penality had, therefore, a 
double effect: it distributed pupils according to their aptitudes and 
their conduct, that is, according to the use that could be made of 
them when they left the school; it exercised over them a constant 
pressure to conform to the same model, so that they might all be 
subjected to ‘subordination, docility, attention in studies and 
exercises, and to the correct practice of duties and all the parts of 
discipline’. So that they might all be like one another. 

In short, the art of punishing, in the regime of disciplinary power, 
is aimed neither at expiation, nor even precisely at repression. It 
brings five quite distinct operations into play: it refers individual 
actions to a whole that is at once a field of comparison, a space of 
differentiation and the principle of a rule to be followed. It differen¬ 
tiates individuals from one another, in terms of the following overall 


182 




The means of correct training 


rule: that the rule be made to function as a minimal threshold, as 
an average to be respected or as an optimum towards which one 
must move. It measures in quantitative terms and hierarchizes in 
terms of value the abilities, the level, the ‘nature’ of individuals. It 
introduces, through this ‘value-giving’ measure, the constraint of 
a conformity that must be achieved. Lastly, it traces the limit 
that will define difference in relation to all other differences, the 
external frontier of the abnormal (the ‘shameful’ class of the ficole 
Militaire). The perpetual penality that traverses all points and 
supervises every instant in the disciplinary institutions compares, 
differentiates, hierarchizes, homogenizes, excludes. In short, it 
normaliies. 

It is opposed, therefore, term by term, to a judicial penality 
