surveillance. The principle was one of ‘embedding’ (^encastrement’). 
The camp was to the rather shameful art of surveillance what the 
dark room was to the great science of optics. 

A whole problematic then develops: that of an architecture that 
is no longer built simply to be seen (as with the ostentation of 
palaces), or to observe the external space (cf. the geometry of for¬ 
tresses), but to permit an internal, articulated and detailed control - 
to render visible those who are inside it; in more general terms, an 
architecture that would operate to transform individuals: to act on 
those it shelters, to provide a hold on their conduct, to carry the 
effects of power right to them, to make it possible to know them, to 
alter them. Stones can make people docile and knowable. The old 
simple schema of confinement and enclosure - thick walls, a heavy 
gate that prevents entering or leaving - began to be replaced by the 
calculation of openings, of filled and empty spaces, passages and 
transparencies. In this way the hospital building was gradually 
organized as an instrument of medical action: it was to allow a better 
observation of patients, and therefore a better calibration of their 
treatment; the form of the buildings, by the careful separation of the 
patients, was to prevent contagions; lastly, the ventilation and the 
air that circulated around each bed was to prevent the deleterious 
vapours from stagnating around the patient, breaking down his 
humours and spreading the disease by their immediate effects. The 
hospital - which was to be built in the second half of the century 
and for which so many plans were drawn up after the Hotel-Dieu 
was burnt down for the second time - was no longer simply the 
roof under which penury and imminent death took shelter; it was, 
in its very materiality, a therapeutic operator. 

Similarly, the school building was to be a mechanism for training. 
It was as a pedagogical machine that Paris-Duverney conceived the 
ficole Militaire, right down to the minute details that he had imposed 
on the architect, Gabriel. Train vigorous bodies, the imperative of 
health; obtain competent officers, the imperative of qualification; 
create obedient soldiers, the imperative of politics; prevent de¬ 
bauchery and homosexuality, the imperative of morality. A fourfold 
reason for establishing sealed compartments between individuals, 
but also apertures for continuous surveillance. The very building 
of the £cole was to be an apparatus for observation; the rooms were 


lyz 




The means of correct training 


