The term ‘penal torture’ does not cover any corporal punishment: 
it is a differentiated production of pain, an organized ritual for the 
marking of victims and the expression of the power that punishes; 
not the expression of a legal system driven to exasperation and. 


34 




The spectacle of the scaffold 


forgetting its principles, losing all restraint. In the ‘excesses’ of 
torture, a whole economy of power is invested. 

The tortured body is first inscribed in the legal ceremonial that 
must produce, open for all to see, the truth of the crime. 

In France, as in most European countries, with the notable 
exception of England, the entire criminal procedure, right up to the 
sentence, remained secret: that is to say, opaque, not only to the 
public but also to the accused himself. It took place without him, 
or at least without his having any knowledge either of the charges 
or of the evidence. In the order of criminal justice, knowledge was 
the absolute privilege of the prosecution. The preliminary investiga¬ 
tion was carried out ‘as diligently and secretly as may be’, as the edict 
of 1498 put it. According to the ordinance of 1670, which confirmed 
and, on certain points, reinforced the severity of the preceding 
period, it was impossible for the accused to have access to the docu¬ 
ments of the case, impossible to know the identity of his accusers, 
impossible to know the nature of the evidence before objecting to 
witnesses, impossible to make use, until the last moments of the 
trial, of the documents in proof, impossible to have a lawyer, either 
to ensure the proper conduct of the case, or to take part, on the 
main issue, in the defence. The magistrate, for his part, had the 
right to accept anonymous denunciations, to conceal from the ac¬ 
cused the nature of the action, to question him with a view to 
catching him out, to use insinuations. (Up to the eighteenth century, 
lengthy arguments took place as to whether, in the course of 
‘captious’ questioning, it was lawful for the judge to use false 
promises, lies, words with double meaning - a whole casuistry of 
legal bad faith.) The magistrate constituted, in solitary omnipotence, 
a truth by which he invested the accused; and the judges received 
this truth ready made, in the form of documents and written state¬ 
ments; for them, these factors alone were proof; they met the 
accused only once in order to question him before passing sentence. 
The secret and written form of the procedure reflects the principle 
that in criminal matters the establishment of truth was the absolute 
