power and the disciplinary power. In the midst of all these mechan¬ 
isms of normalization, which are becoming ever more rigorous in 
their application, the specificity of the prison and its role as link are 
losing something of their purpose. 

If there is an overall political issue around the prison, it is not 
therefore whether it is to be corrective or not; whether the judges, 
the psychiatrists or the sociologists are to exercise more power in it 
than the administrators or supervisors; it is not even whether we 
should have prison or something other than prison. At present, the 
problem lies rather in the steep rise in the use of these mechanisms 
of normalization and the wide-ranging powers which, through the 
proliferation of new disciplines, they bring with them. 


306 




The carceral 


In 1836, a correspondent wrote to La Phalange: ‘Moralists, 
philosophers, legislators, flatterers of civilization, this is the plan of 
your Paris, neatly ordered and arranged, here is the improved plan 
in which all like things are gathered together. At the centre, and 
within a first enclosure; hospitals for all diseases, almshouse» for 
all types of poverty, madhouses, prisons, convict-prisons for men, 
women and children. Around the first enclosure, barracks, court¬ 
rooms, police stations, houses for prison warders, scaffolds, houses 
for the executioner and his assistants. At the four corners, the 
Chamber of Deputies, the Chamber of Peers, the Institute and the 
Royal Palace. Outside, there are the various services that supply 
the central enclosure, commerce, with its swindlers and its bank¬ 
ruptcies; industry and its furious struggles; the press, with its 
sophisms; the gambling dens; prostitution, the people dying of 
hunger or wallowing in debauchery, always ready to lend an ear 
to the voice of the Genius of Revolutions; the heartless rich. . . 
Lastly the ruthless war of all against all’ {La Phalange, 10 August 
1836). 

I shall stop with this anonymous text. We are now far away from 
the country of tortures, dotted with wheels, gibbets, gallows, 
pillories; we are far, too, from that dream of the reformers, less 
than fifty years before: the city of punishments in which a thousand 
small theatres would have provided an endless multicoloured repre¬ 
sentation of justice in which the punishments, meticulously pro¬ 
duced on decorative scaffolds, would have constituted the permanent 
festival of the penal code. The carceral city, with its imaginary 
‘geo-politics’, is governed by quite different principles. The extract 
from La Phalange reminds us of some of the more important ones: 
that at the centre of this city, and as if to hold it in place, there is, 
not the ‘centre of power’, not a network of forces, but a multiple 
network of diverse elements - walls, space, institution, rules, dis¬ 
course; that the model of the carceral city is not, therefore, the body 
of the king, with the powers that emanate from it, nor the contrac¬ 
tual meeting of wills from which a body that was both individual 
and collective was born, but a strategic distribution of elements of 
different natures and levels. That the prison is not the daughter of 
laws, codes or the judicial apparatus; that it is not subordinated to 
the court and the docile or clumsy instrument of the sentences that 

307 



Prison 


it hands out and of the results that it would like to achieve; that it is 
the court that is external and subordinate to the prison. That in the 
central position that it occupies, it is not alone, but linked to a whole 
series of ‘carceral’ mechanisms which seem distinct enough - since 
they are intended to alleviate pain, to cure, to comfort - but which 
all tend, like the prison, to exercise a power of normalization. That 
these mechanisms are applied not to transgressions against a ‘central’ 
law, but to the apparatus of production - ‘commerce’ and ‘industry’ 
- to a whole multiplicity of illegalities, in all their diversity of nature 
and origin, their specific role in profit and the different ways in 
which they are dealt with by the punitive mechanisms. And that 
ultimately what presides over all these mechanisms is not the unitary 
functioning of an apparatus or an institution, but the necessity of 
combat and the rules of strategy. That, consequently, the notions of 
institutions of repression, rejection, exclusion, marginalization, are 
not adequate to describe, at the very centre of the carceral city, the 
formation of the insidious leniencies, unavowable petty cruelties, 
small acts of cunning, calculated methods, techniques, ‘sciences’ 
that permit the fabrication of the disciplinary individual. In this 
central and centralized humanity, the effect and instrument of com¬ 
plex power relations, bodies and forces subjected by multiple 
mechanisms of ‘incarceration’, objects for discourses that are in 
themselves elements for this strategy, we must hear the distant roar 
of battle. 

At this point I end a book that must serve as a historical back¬ 
ground to various studies of the power of normalization and the 
formation of knowledge in modern society. 


