the subject who has dared to violate the law and the all-powerful 
sovereign who displays his strength. Although redress of the private 
injury occasioned by the offence must be proportionate, although the 
sentence must be equitable, the punishment is carried out in such a 
way as to give a spectacle not of measure, but of imbalance and 
excess; in this liturgy of punishment, there must be an emphatic 
affirmation of power and of its intrinsic superiority. And this superi¬ 
ority is not simply that of right, but that of the physical strength 
of the sovereign beating down upon the body of his adversary and 
mastering it: by breaking the law, the offender has touched the very 
person of the prince; and it is the prince - or at least those to whom 
he has delegated his force - who seizes upon the body of the con¬ 
demned man and displays it marked, beaten, broken. The ceremony 
of punishment, then, is an exercise of ‘terror’. When the jurists of 
the eighteenth century began their polemic with the reformers, they 
offered a restrictive, ‘modernist’ interpretation of the physical 
cruelty of the penalties imposed by the law: if severe penalties are 
required, it is because their example must be deeply inscribed in the 
hearts of men. Yet, in fact, what had hitherto maintained this 
practice of torture was not an economy of example, in the sense in 
which it was to be understood at the time of the idiologues (that the 
representation of the penalty should be greater than the interest of 
the crime), but a policy of terror: to make everyone aware, through 
the body of the criminal, of the unrestrained presence of the sover¬ 
eign. The public execution did not re-establish justice; it reactivated 
power. In the seventeenth century, and even in the early eighteenth 
century, it was not, therefore, with all its theatre of terror, a linger¬ 
ing hang-over from an earlier age. Its ruthlessness, its spectacle, its 
physical violence, its unbalanced play of forces, its meticulous 
ceremonial, its entire apparatus were inscribed in the political 
functioning of the penal system. 

This enables us to understand some of the characteristics of the 
liturgy of torture and execution - above all, the importance of a 
ritual that was to deploy its pomp in public. Nothing was to be 
hidden of this triumph of the law. Its episodes were traditionally the 
same and yet the sentences never failed to list them, so important 
were they in the penal mechanism: processions, halts at crossroads 


49 




Torture 


and church doors, the public reading of the sentence, kneeling, 
declarations of repentance for the offence to God and to the king. 
