body of knowledge built up about them. This disciplinary technique 
exercised upon the body had a double effect: a ‘soul’ to be known 
and a subjection to be maintained. One result vindicated this work of 
training: in 1848, at a moment when ‘the fever of revolution fired the 
imagination of all, when the schools at Angers, La Fl^che, Alfort, 
even the boarding schools, rose up in rebellion, the inmates of 
Mettray were calmer than ever’ (Ferrus). 

Where Mettray was especially exemplary was in the specificity 
that it recognized in this operation of training. It was related to 
other forms of supervision, on which it was based: medicine, general 
education, religious direction. But it cannot not be identified abso¬ 
lutely with them. Nor with administration in the strict sense. Heads 
or deputy-heads of ‘families’, monitors and foremen, had to live in 
close proximity to the inmates; their clothes were ‘almost as humble’ 
as those of the inmates themselves; they practically never left their 
side, observing them day and night; they constituted among them 
a network of permanent observation. And, in order to train them 
themselves, a specialized school had been organized in the colony. 
The essential element of its programme was to subject the future 
cadres to the same apprenticeships and to the same coercions as the 
inmates themselves: they were ‘subjected as pupils to the discipline 
that, later, as instructors, they would themselves impose’. They were 
taught the art of power relations. It was the first training college in 
pure discipline: the ‘penitentiary’ was not simply a project that 
sought its justification in ‘humanity’ or its foundations in a ‘science’, 
but a technique that was learnt, transmitted and which obeyed 
general norms. The practice that normalized by compulsion the 
conduct of the undisciplined or dangerous could, in turn, by 
technical elaboration and rational reflection, be ‘normalized’. The 
disciplinary technique became a ‘discipline’ which also had its 
school. 

It so happens that historians of the human sciences date the birth 
of scientific psychology at this time: during these same years, it 
seems, Weber was manipulating his little compass for the measure¬ 
ment of sensations. What took place at Mettray (and in other 


295 



Prison 


European countries sooner or later) was obviously of a quite differ¬ 
ent order. It was the emergence or rather the institutional specifica¬ 
tion, the baptism as it were, of a new type of supervision - both 
knowledge and power - over individuals who resisted disciplinary 
