criricized for any unemployment it may give rise to: with its limited 
extent, and its low output, it cannot have a general effect on the 
economy. It is intrinsically useful, not as an activity of production, 
but by virtue of the effect it has on the human mechanism. It is a 
principle of order and regularity; through the demands that it 
imposes, it conveys, imperceptibly, the forms of a rigorous power; 
it bends bodies to regular movements, it excludes agitation and 
distraction, it imposes a hierarchy and a surveillance that are all the 
more accepted, and which will be inscribed all the more deeply in 
the behaviour of the convicts, in that they form part of its logic: 
with work ‘the rule is introduced into a prison, it reigns there with¬ 
out effort, without the use of any repressive and violent means. 
By occupying the convict, one gives him habits of order and obedi¬ 
ence; one makes the idler that he was diligent and active ... with 
time, he finds in the regular movement of the prison, in the manual 
labours to which he is subjected ... a certain remedy against the 
wanderings of his imagination’ (B 4 renger). Penal labour must be 
seen as the very machinery that transforms the violent, agitated, 
unreflective convict into a part that plays its role with perfect 
regularity. The prison is not a workshop; it is, it must be of itself, 
a machine whose convict-workers are both the cogs and the pro¬ 
ducts; it ‘occupies them continually, with the sole aim of filling their 
moments. When the body is agitated, when the mind applies itself 
to a particular object, importunate ideas depart, calm is born once 
again in the soul’ (Danjou, 180). If, in the final analysis, the work of 
the prison has an economic effect, it is by producing individuals 
mechanized according to the general norms of an industrial society: 
‘Work is the providence of the modern peoples; it replaces morality, 
fills the gap left by beliefs and is regarded as the principle of all good. 
Work must be the religion of the prisons. For a machine-society, 
purely mechanical means of reform are required’ (Faucher, 64; in 
England the ‘treadmill’ and the pump provided a disciplinary 
mechanization of the inmates, with no end product). The making 
of machine-men, but also of proletarians; in effect, when one has 


242 




Complete and austere institutions 


only a ‘pair of arms for any good work’, one can live only ‘from 
the product of one’s labour, through the practice of a profession or 
from the product of the labour of others, by thieving’; but, although 
the prison did not force offenders to work, it seems to have reintro¬ 
duced into its very institution and, obliquely, by means of taxation, 
this levying by some on the labour of others: ‘The question of 
idleness is the same as in society; it is from the labour of others that 
the convicts live, if they do not exist from their own labour’ (Lucas, 
II, 313-14). The labour by which the convict contributes to his 
own needs turns the thief into a docile worker. This is the utility 
of remuneration for penal labour; it imposes on the convict the 
‘moral’ form of wages as the condition of his existence. Wages 
inculcate the ‘love and habit’ of work (Lucas, II, 243); they give 
those malefactors who do not know the difference between mine 
and thine a sense of property - of ‘what one has earned by the sweat 
of one’s brow’ (Danjou, 210-11; cf. also L'Atelier, 6th year, no. 2, 
November 1845); they also teach those who have lived in dissipa¬ 
tion the virtues of thrift and foresight (Lucas; a third of the prisoner’s 
daily wages was set aside for the day when he left the prison); lastly, 
by proposing a quantity of work to be carried out, they make it 
possible to express quantitatively the convict’s zeal and the progress 
of his improvement (Ducp^tiaux, 30-31). The wages of penal labour 
do not reward production; they function as a motive and measure 
of individual transformation: it is a legal fiction, since it does not 
represent the ‘free’ granting of labour power, but an artifice that 
is presumed to be effective in the techniques of correction. 

What, then, is the use of penal labour.^ Not profit; nor even the 
formation of a useful skill; but the constitution of a power relation, 
an empty economic form, a schema of individual submission and of 
adjustment to a production apparatus. 

The perfect image of prison labour was the women’s workshop 
at Clairvaux; the silent precision of the human machinery is reminis¬ 
cent of the regulated rigour of the convent: ‘On a throne, above 
which is a crucifix, a sister is sitting; before her, arranged in two 
rows, the prisoners are carrying out the task imposed on them, and, 
as needlework accounts for almost all the work, the strictest silence 
is constantly maintained. . . It seems that, in these halls, the very 
air breathes penitence and expiation. One is carried back, as by a 


243 



Prison 


spontaneous movement, to the time of the venerable habits of this 
ancient place, one remembers those voluntary penitents who shut 
themselves up here in order to say farewell to the world’. Compare 
this with the following; ‘Go into a cotton-mill; listen to the con¬ 
versations of the workers and the whistling of the machines. Is there 
any contrast in the world more afflicting than the regularity and 
predictability of these mechanical movements, compared with the 
