representations as a principle in a politics of bodies that was much 
more effective than the ritual anatomy of torture and execution. The 
thought of the Ideologues was not only a theory of the individual 
and society; it developed as a technology of subtle, effective, 
economic powers, in opposition to the sumptuous expenditure of 
the power of the sovereign. Let us hear once more what Servan has 
to say; the ideas of crime and punishment must be strongly linked 
and ‘follow one another without interruption. . . When you have 
thus formed the chain of ideas in the heads of your citizens, you will 
then be able to pride yourselves on guiding them and being their 
masters. A stupid despot may constrain his slaves with iron chains; 
but a true politician binds them even more strongly by the chain of 


102 



Generalized punishment 


their own ideas; it is at the stable point of reason that he secures the 
end of the chain; this link is all the stronger in that we do not know 
of what it is made and we believe it to be our own work; despair 
and time eat away the bonds of iron and steel, but they are power¬ 
less against the habitual union of ideas, they can only tighten it still 
more; and on the soft fibres of the brain is founded the unshakable 
base of the soundest of Empires’ (Servan, 35). 

It is this semio-technique of punishments, this ‘ideological 
power’ which, partly at least, will remain in suspense and will be 
superseded by a new political anatomy, in which the body, once 
again, but in a new form, will be the principal character. And this 
new political anatomy will permit the intersection of the two 
divergent lines of objectification that are to be seen emerging in the 
eighteenth century: that which rejects the criminal ‘from the other 
side’ - from the side of a nature against nature; and that which seeks 
to control delinquency by a calculated economy of punishments. A 
glance at the new art of punishing clearly reveals the supersession 
of the punitive semio-technique by a new politics of the body. 


103 




2. The gentle way in punishment 


The art of punishing, then, must rest on a wiiole teclinology of 
representation. The undertaking can succeed only if it forms part of 
a natural mechanics. ‘Like the gravitation of bodies, a secret force 
compels us ever towards our well-being. This impulsion is affected 
only by the obstacles that laws oppose to it. All the diverse actions 
of man are the effects of this interior tendency.’ To find the suitable 
punishment for a crime is to find the disadvantage whose idea is 
such that it robs for ever the idea of a crime of any attraction. It 
is an art of conflicting energies, an art of images linked by associa¬ 
tion, the forging of stable connections that defy time: it is a matter 
of establishing the representation of pairs of opposing values, of 
establishing quantitative differences between the opposing forces, 
of setting up a complex of obstacle-signs that may subject the 
movement of the forces to a power relation. ‘Let the idea of torture 
and execution be ever present in the heart of the weak man and 
dominate the feeling that drives him to crime’ (Beccaria, 119). These 
obstacle-signs must constitute the new arsenal of penalties, just as the 
old public executions were organized around a system of retaliatory 
marks. But in order to function, they must obey several conditions. 

I. They must be as unarbitrary as possible. It is true that it is 
society that defines, in terms of its own interests, what must be 
regarded as a crime: it is not therefore natural. But, if punishment 
is to present itself to the mind as soon as one thinks of committing a 
crime, as immediate a link as possible must be made between the 
two: a link of resemblance, analogy, proximity. ‘The penalty must 
be made to conform as closely as possible to the nature of the 
offence, so that fear of punishment diverts the mind from the road 
along which the prospect of an advantageous crime was leading it’ 
(Beccaria, 119). The ideal punishment would be transparent to the 


104 




The gentle way in punishment 


crime that it punishes; thus, for him who contemplates it, it will be 
infallibly the sign of the crime that it punishes; and for him who 
dreams of the crime, the idea of the offence will be enough to arouse 
the sign of the punishment. This is an advantage for the stability of 
the link, an advantage for the calculation of the proportions between 
crime and punishment and the quantitative reading of interests; it 
also has the advantage that, by assuming the form of a natural 
sequence, punishment does not appear as the arbitrary effect of a 
human power: ‘To derive the offence from the punishment is the 
best means of proportioning punishment to crime. If this is the 
