supported. At most, one had seen in the seventeenth century the 
different fiscal refusals coalesce in serious revolts among widely 
separated social strata. In short, the reciprocal interplay of illegali¬ 
ties formed part of the political and economic life of society. Or 
rather, a number of transformations (the abe5^nce into which 
Colbert’s regulations had fallen, for example, the non-observance 
of customs barriers within the kingdom, the breakdown of guild 
practices) had operated in the breach that was being widened every 
day by popular illegality; the bourgeoisie had needed these trans¬ 
formations; and economic growth was due, in part, to them. 
Tolerance then became encouragement. 

In the second half of the eighteenth cenmry, the process tended to 
be reversed. First, with the general increase in wealth, but also with 
the sudden demographic expansion, the principal target of popular 
illegality tended to be not so much rights, as goods: pilfering 
and theft tended to replace smuggling and the armed struggle 
against the tax agents. And, in this respect, the peasants, farmers 
and artisans were often its principal victims. Le Trosne was no 
doubt exaggerating a real tendency when he described the peasants’ 
suffering under the exactions of vagabonds, even more than they 
had suffered under feudal demands: thieves now attacked them like 
a cloud of maleficent insects, devouring crops and depleting the 
granaries (Le Trosne, 1764, 4). It might be said that gradually in 
the eighteenth century a crisis of popular illegality had occurred; 
and neither the movements at the beginning of the Revolution 
(around the refusal of seigniorial rights), nor those later movements, 
in which the struggle against property rights, political and religious 
protests and the refusal of conscription came together, recombined 
illegality in its old, welcoming form. Furthermore, although a large 
part of the bourgeoisie had accepted, without too much trouble. 


84 




Generalized punishment 


the illegality of rights, it found it difficult to support illegality when 
it was a question of its own property rights. Nothing could be more 
typical of this than the problem of peasant delinquency at the end 
of the eighteenth century and especially after the Revolution 
(Berce, i6i). The transition to an intensive agriculture exercised, 
over the rights to use common lands, over various tolerated prac¬ 
tices, over small accepted illegalities, a more and more restrictive 
pressure. Furthermore, as it was acquired in part by the bourgeoisie, 
now free of the feudal burdens that once weighed upon it, landed 
property became absolute property: all the tolerated ‘rights’ that 
the peasantry had acquired or preserved (the abandonment of old 
obligations or the consolidation of irregular practices: the right of 
free pasture, wood-collecting, etc.) were now rejected by the new 
owners who regarded them quite simply as theft (thus leading, 
among the people, to a series of chain reactions of an increasingly 
illegal, or, if one prefers the term, criminal kind: breaches of close, 
the theft or killing of cattle, fires, assaults, murders (cf. Festy 
and Agulhon). The illegality of rights, which often meant 
the survival of the most deprived, tended, with the new status of 
property, to become an illegality of property. It then had to be 
punished. 

And this illegality, while resented by the bourgeoisie where the 
ownership of land was concerned, was intolerable in commercial and 
industrial ownership: the development of the ports, the appearance 
of great warehouses in which merchandise was stored, the organiza¬ 
tion of huge workshops (with considerable quantities of raw 
materials, tools and manufactured articles, which belonged to the 
entrepreneurs and which were difficult to supervise) also necessitated 
a severe repression of illegality. The way in which wealth tended to 
be invested, on a much larger scale than ever before, in commodities 
and machines presupposed a systematic, armed intolerance of 
illegality. The phenomenon was obviously very evident where 
economic development was most intense. Colquhoun set out to 
give proof, supported by figures, of the urgent need to check the 
innumerable illegal practices that had grown up: according to the 
estimates of the entrepreneurs and insurance companies, the theft 
of produce imported from America and warehoused along the banks 
of the Thames had risen, on average, to ^(^250,000 per annum; in 


85 




Punishment 


all, approximately £^00,000 worth of goods was stolen each year 
in the Port of London itself (and this did not include the arsenals 
and warehouses outside the port proper); to this should be added 
£700,000 for the town itself. In this situation of permanent pilfering, 
three phenomena, says Colquhoun, should be taken into considera¬ 
tion: first, the complicity and often the active participation of the 
clerks, overseers, foremen and workers: ‘Whenever a large number 
of workers are gathered together in one place, there are bound to be 
a lot of bad characters among them’; second, the existence of a whole 
organization of illicit commerce, which began in the workshops or 
