now appeared, that of some dark, secret understanding between 
those who enforced the law and those who violated it. The Shake¬ 
spearian age when sovereignty confronted abomination in a single 
character had gone; the everyday melodrama of police power and of 
the complicities that crime formed with power was soon to begin. 

Opposite Vidocq stood his contemporary, Lacenaire. His pres¬ 
ence, assured for ever in the paradise of the aesthetes of crime, is 
surprising enough: despite all his good will, his neophyte’s zeal, he 
was only able to commit, and even then with a singular lack of skill, 
no more than a few minor crimes; he was so strongly suspected of 
being a police spy that the administration had to protect him against 
his fellow prisoners, who tried to kill him (the charge was formally 
taken up by Canler, 15), and it was the fashionable society of Louis- 
Philippe’s Paris that gave him, before his execution, a feast beside 
which many a later literary resurrection has been little more than 
academic homage. His fame owed nothing either to the extent of his 
crimes or to the art of their conception; it was their ineptitude that 
gave cause for surprise. But it did owe a great deal to the visible 
play, in what he did and what he said, between illegality and delin¬ 
quency. Swindling, desertion, petty theft, imprisonment, the revival 


283 




Prison 


of friendships made in prison, mutual blackmail, recidivism, up to 
the last, failed attempt at murder - Lacenaire is the typical ‘delin¬ 
quent’. But he brought with him, at least potentially, a horizon of 
illegalities that had, until quite recently, represented a threat: this 
ruined petty bourgeois, of good education, would, a generation 
earlier,have been a revolutionary, a Jacobin, a regicide;^® had he been 
a contemporary of Robespierre, his rejection of the law would have 
taken a directly political form. Born in 1800, at more or less the 
same time as Stendhal’s Julien Sorel, his character bears the trace 
of these possibilities; but they took the form of theft, murder and 
denunciation. All these potentialities became a delinquency of no 
great moment: in this sense, Lacenaire is a reassuring character. 
And if these potentialities reappear, it is in what he says about the 
theory of crime. At the moment of his death, Lacenaire manifested 
the triumph of delinquency over illegality, or rather the figure of an 
illegality, on the one hand, dragged down into delinquency, and, 
on the other, displaced towards an aesthetics of crime, that is to say, 
towards an art of the privileged classes. There is a symmetry be¬ 
tween Lacenaire and Vidocq, who in the same period, made it 
possible to turn delinquency in upon itself by constituting it as an 
enclosed, observable milieu and by displacing towards police tech¬ 
niques a whole delinquent practice that was becoming the licit 
illegality of power. That the Parisian bourgeoisie should have 
feasted Lacenaire, that his cell should have been open to famous 
visitors, that he should have been showered with praise during the 
last days of his life, he whose death his plebeian fellow prisoners had 
demanded before his judges had done so, he who had done every¬ 
thing, in court, to bring his accomplice Frangois to the scaffold, 
there was a reason for all this: what was being celebrated was the 
symbolic figure of an illegality kept within the bounds of delin¬ 
quency and transformed into discourse - that is to say, made doubly 
inoffensive; the bourgeoisie had invented for itself a new pleasure, 
which it has still far from outgrown. It should not be forgotten that 
Lacenaire’s celebrated death succeeded in muffling the echoes of 
Fieschi’s attempt on the life of Louis-Philippe; Fieschi, one of the 
most recent of the regicides, represented the converse figure of a 
petty criminality leading to political violence. Nor should we forget 
that it took place a few months before the departure of the last 




Illegalities and delinquency 


chain-gang and the scandalous demonstrations that accompanied it. 
These two festivals overlapped in history; and, indeed, Fran5ois, 
Lacenaire’s accomplice, was one of the best-known characters in the 
chain-gang of 19 July.®* The one extended the ancient rituals of the 
public execution at the risk of reactivating popular illegalities around 
the criminals. It was to be prohibited, for the criminal was no longer 
to occupy any other space than that appropriate to delinquency. 
The other inaugurated the theoretical play of an illegality of the 
privileged; or rather it marked the moment when the political and 
economic illegalities actually practised by the bourgeoisie were to 
be duplicated in theoretical and aesthetic representation: the ‘Meta¬ 
physics of crime’, a term often associated with Lacenaire. The French 
translation of De Quincey’s Murder Considered as One of the Fine 
Arts was published in 1849. 

This production of delinquency and its investment by the penal 
apparatus must be taken for what they are: not results acquired once 
and for all, but tactics that shift according to how closely they reach 
their target. The split between delinquency and other illegalities, the 
way in which it is turned back upon them, its colonization by the 
dominant illegality - these all appear clearly in the way in which the 
police-prison system functions; yet they have always met with 
resistance; they have given rise to struggles and provoked reaction. 
Erecting the barrier to separate delinquents from all the lower strata 
