and ‘vicious and insubordinate wards of the Public Assistance’ (on 
all these institutions, cf. Gaillac, 99-107). And, moving still farther 
away from penality in the strict sense, the carceral circles widen and 
the form of the prison slowly diminishes and finally disappears 
altogether: the institutions for abandoned or indigent children, the 
orphanages (like Neuhof or Mesnil-Firmin), the establishments for 
apprentices (like the Bethleem de Reims or the Maison de Nancy); 
still farther away the factory-convents, such as La Sauvagere, 
Tarare and Jujurieu (where the girl workers entered about the age of 
thirteen, lived confined for years and were allowed out only under 
surveillance, received instead of wages pledged payment, which 
could be increased by bonuses for zeal and good behaviour, which 
they could use only on leaving). And then, still farther, there was a 
whole series of mechanisms that did not adopt the ‘compact’ prison 
model, but used some of the carceral methods: charitable societies, 
moral improvement associations, organizations that handed out 
assistance and also practised surveillance, workers’ estates and 
lodging houses - the most primitive of which still bear the all too 
visible marks of the penitentiary system.* And, lastly, this great 
carceral network reaches all the disciplinary mechanisms that func¬ 
tion throughout society. 

We have seen that, in penal justice, the prison transformed the 
punitive procedure into a penitentiary technique; the carceral archi¬ 
pelago transported this technique from the penal institution to the 
entire social body. With several important results. 

I. This vast mechanism established a slow, continuous, imper¬ 
ceptible gradation that made it possible to pass naturally from dis¬ 
order to offence and back from a transgression of the law to a slight 
departure from a rule, an average, a demand, a norm. In the classical 
period, despite a certain common reference to offence in general,® 
the order of the crime, the order of sin and the order of bad conduct 


298 



The carceral 


remained separate in so far as they related to separate criteria and 
authorities (court, penitence, confinement). Incarceration with its 
mechanisms of surveillance and punishment functioned, on the 
contrary, according to a principle of relative continuity. The con^ 
tinuity of the institutions themselves, which were linked to one 
another (public assistance with the orphanage, the reformitory, the 
penitentiary, the disciplinary battalion, the prison; the school with 
the charitable society, the workshop, the almshouse, the peniten¬ 
tiary convent; the workers’ estate with the hospital and the prison). 
A continuity of the punitive criteria and mechanisms, which on the 
basis of a mere deviation gradually strengthened the rules and 
increased the punishment. A continuous gradation of the established, 
specialized and competent authorities (in the order of knowledge 
and in the order of power) which, without resort to arbitrariness, 
but strictly according to the regulations, by means of observation 
and assessment hierarchized, differentiated, judged, punished and 
moved gradually from the correction of irregularities to the punish¬ 
ment of crime. The ‘carceral’ with its many diffuse or compact 
forms, its institutions of supervision or constraint, of discreet sur¬ 
veillance and insistent coercion, assured the communication of 
punishments according to quality and quantity; it connected in 
series or disposed according to subtle divisions the minor and the 
serious penalties, the mild and the strict forms of treatment, bad 
marks and light sentences. You will end up in the convict-ship, the 
slightest indiscipline seems to say; and the harshest of prisons says 
to the prisoners condemned to life: I shall note the slightest irregu¬ 
larity in your conduct. The generality of the punitive function that 
the eighteenth century sought in the ‘ideological’ technique of 
representations and signs now had as its support the extension, the 
material framework, complex, dispersed, but coherent, of the various 
carceral mechanisms. As a result, a certain significant generality 
moved between the least irregularity and the greatest crime; it was no 
longer the offence, the attack on the common interest, it was the 
departure from the norm, the anomaly; it was this that haunted 
the school, the court, the asylum or the prison. It generalized in 
the sphere of meaning the function that the carceral generalized in the 
sphere of tactics. Replacing the adversary of the sovereign, the 
social enemy was transformed into a deviant, who brought with him 




Prison 


the multiple danger of disorder, crime and madness. The carceral 
network linked, through innumerable relations, the two long, 
multiple series of the punitive and the abnormal. 

2. The carceral, with its far-reaching networks, allows the re¬ 
cruitment of major ‘delinquents’. It organizes what might be called 
‘disciplinary careers’ in which, through various exclusions and 
rejections, a whole process is set in motion. In the classical period, 
there opened up in the confines or interstices of society the confused, 
tolerant and dangerous domain of the ‘outlaw’ or at least of that 
which eluded the direct hold of power: an uncertain space that was 
for criminality a training ground and a region of refuge; there 
poverty, unemployment, pursued innocence, cunning, the struggle 
