formed into ‘congregations’, in an attempt to inure them to work 
in the workshops; the framework of the ‘factory-monastery’ was 


149 



Discipline 


imposed upon the workers. In the Protestant armies of Maurice of 
Orange and Gustavus Adolphus, military discipline was achieved 
through a rhythmics of time punctuated by pious exercises; army 
life, Boussanelle was later to say, should have some of the ‘perfec¬ 
tions of the cloister itself’ (Boussanelle, 2; on the religious character 
of discipline in the Swedish army, cf. The Swedish Discipline, 
London, 1632). For centuries, the religious orders had been masters 
of discipline; they were the specialists of time, the great technicians 
of rhythm and regular activities. But the disciplines altered these 
methods of temporal regulation from which they derived. They 
altered them first by refining them. One began to count in quarter 
hours, in minutes, in seconds. This happened in the army, of course: 
Guibert systematically implemented the chronometric measurement 
of shooting that had been suggested earlier by Vauban. In the ele¬ 
mentary schools, the division of time became increasingly minute; 
activities were governed in detail by orders that had to be obeyed 
immediately: ‘At the last stroke of the hour, a pupil will ring the 
bell, and at the first sound of the bell all the pupils will kneel, with 
their arms crossed and their eyes lowered. When the prayer has been 
said, the teachet will strike the signal once to indicate that the pupils 
should get up, a second time as a sign that they should salute Christ, 
and a third that they should sit down’ (La Salle, Conduite ..., 27-8). 
In the early nineteenth century, the following time-table was sug¬ 
gested for the Ecoles mutuelles, or ‘mutual improvement schools’: 
8.45 entrance of the monitor, 8.52 the monitor’s summons, 8.56 
entrance of the children and prayer, 9.00 the children go to their 
benches, 9.04 first slate, 9.08 end of dictation, 9.12 second slate, etc. 
(Tronchot, 221). The gradual extension of the wage-earning class 
brought with it a more detailed partitioning of time; ‘If workers 
arrive later than a quarter of an hour after the ringing of the bell...’ 
(Amboise, article 2); ‘if any one of the companions is asked for 
during work and loses more than five minutes ...’, ‘anyone who is 

not at his work at the correct time_’ (Oppenheim, article 7-8). 

But an attempt is also made to assure the quality of the time used: 
constant supervision, the pressure of supervisors, the elimination o£ 
anything that might disturb or distract; it is a question of constitut¬ 
ing a totally useful time: ‘It is expressly forbidden during work to 
amuse one’s companions by gestures or in any other way, to play 


150 



Docile bodies 


at any game whatsoever, to eat, to sleep, to tell stories and comedies’ 
(Oppenheim, article i6); and even during the meal-break, ‘there will 
be no telling of stories, adventures or other such talk that distracts 
the workers from their work’; ‘it is expressly forbidden for any 
worker, under any pretext, to bring wine into the manufactory and 
to drink in the workshops’ {Amboise, article 4). Time measured and 
paid must also be a time without impurities or defects; a time of 
good quality, throughout which the body is constantly applied to 
its exercise. Precision and application are, with regularity, the funda¬ 
mental virtues of disciplinary time. But this is not the newest thing 
about it. Other methods are more characteristic of the disciplines. 

2. The temporal elaboration of the act. There are, for example, two 
ways of controlling marching troops. In the early seventeenth 
century, we have: ‘Accustomed soldiers marching in file or in 
battalion to march to the rhythm of the drum. And to do this, one 
must begin with the right foot so that the whole troop raises the 
same foot at the same time’ (Montgommery, 86). In the mid¬ 
eighteenth century, there are four sorts of steps: ‘The length of the 
the short step will be a foot, that of the ordinary step, the double 
step and the marching step will be two feet, the whole measured from 
one heel to the next; as for the duration, that of the small step and 
the ordinary step will last one second, during which two double 
steps would be performed; the duration of the marching step will be 
a little longer than one second. The oblique step will take one 
second; it will be at most eighteen inches from one heel to the next. 
... The ordinary step will be executed forwards, holding the head 
up high and the body erect, holding oneself in balance successively 
on a single leg, and bringing the other forwards, the ham taut, the 
point of the foot a little turned outwards and low, so that one may 
without affectation brush the ground on which one must walk and 
place one’s foot, in such a way that each part may come to rest there 
at the same time without striking the ground’ (‘Ordonnance du i®*’ 
janvier 1766, pour regler I’exercise de I’infanterie’). Between these 
two instructions, a new set of restraints had been brought into play, 
another degree of precision in the breakdown of gestures and move¬ 
ments, another way of adjusting the body to temporal imperatives. 

What the ordinance of 1766 defines is not a time-table - the 
general framework for an activity; it is rather a collective and 
