the object of a scientific technique are superimposed - or almost - 
one upon the other. That the grip of the prison on the penal system 
should not have led to a violent reaction of rejection is no doubt 
due to many reasons. One of these is that, in fabricating delinquency, 
it gave to criminal justice a unitary field of objects, authenticated 
by the ‘sciences’, and thus enabled it to function on a general 
horizon of ‘truth’. 

The prison, that darkest region in the apparatus of justice, is the 
place where the power to punish, which no longer dares to manifest 
itself openly, silently organizes a field of objectivity in which 
punishment will be able to function openly as treatment and the 
sentence be inscribed among the discourses of knowledge. It is 
understandable that justice should have adopted so easily a prison 
that was not the offspring of its own thoughts. Justice certainly owed 
the prison this recognition. 




2 . 


Illegalities and delinquency 


From the point of view of the law, detention may be a mere depriva¬ 
tion of liberty. But the imprisonment that performs this function 
has always involved a technical project. The transition from the 
public execution, with its spectacular rituals, its art mingled with the 
ceremony of pain, to the penalties of prisons buried in architectural 
masses and guarded by the secrecy of administrations, is not a 
transition to an undifferentiated, abstract, confused penality; it is the 
transition from one art of punishing to another, no less skilful one. 
It is a technical mutation. From this transition spring a symptom and 
a symbol: the replacement, in 1837, of the chain-gang by the police 
carriage. 

The chain-gang, a tradition that went back to the time of the 
galley slaves, was still surviving under the July monarchy. The 
importance it seems to have assumed as a spectacle at the beginning 
of the nineteenth century may be bound up with the fact that it 
combined in a single manifestation the two modes of punishment: 
the way to detention unfolded as a ceremonial of torture. (Faucher 
remarked that the chain-gang was a popular spectacle ‘especially 
since the scaffolds were almost entirely abolished’.) The accounts of 
the ‘last chain-gangs’ — those that crossed France in the summer of 
1836 - and of its scandals allow us to rediscover this functioning, so 
alien to the rules of ‘penitentiary science’. It began with a scaffold 
ritual: the fixing of iron collars and chains in the courtyard of 
Bicetre prison. The convict’s neck was thrown back upon a block; 
but this time the art of the executioner was to strike without crush¬ 
ing the head - an inverted skill that knew how not to deliver the 
death blow. ‘The courtyard of Bicetre displays its instruments of 
torture: several rows of chains with their iron-collars. The artoupans 
(head-warders), who serve as temporary blacksmiths, arrange the 


257 



Prison 


block and hammer. Around the bars of the wall walk are stuck all 
those heads, wearing a gloomy or bold expression^ which the opera¬ 
tor is to rivet. Higher up, at every storey of the prison, one sees legs 
and arrns dangling through the bars of the cells, as at some bazaar 
of human flesh; these are the prisoners who have come to assist at 
the toilet of their comrades of the day before. . . Here they are in 
the attitude of sacrifice. They are stitting on the ground, coupled at 
random by the waist; the chains they must carry, each weighing 
eight pounds, rest heavily on their knees. The operator inspects 
them, measuring heads and adapting the enormous inch-thick 
collars. It takes three men to rivet an iron-collar; the first holds up 
the block, the second holds the two branches of the iron-collar 
together and, with his two outstretched arms, secures the patient’s 
head; the third strikes with repeated blows and flattens the bolt 
under his huge hammer. Each blow shakes the head and the body. 
... Indeed, one does not think of the danger that the victim might 
face if the hammer missed its mark; this impression is nullified or 
rather defaced before the profound impression of horror one 
experiences in contemplating one of God’s creatures in such a state 
of abasement.’* It also had the dimension of a public spectacle; 
according to the Gaiette des tribimaux, over 100,000 people watched 
the chain-gang leave Paris on 19 July: ‘The descent from the Cour- 
tille to the Mardi Gras. ..’ Order and wealth came to watch from a 
distance the passing of the great nomadic tribe that had been put in 
chains, that other species, ‘the race apart that has the privilege of 
populating the convict-ships and prisons’. The spectators of the 
lower classes, as at the time of the public executions, kept up their 
ambiguous exchanges with the convicts, alternating insults, threats, 
words of encouragement, blows, signs of hate or complicity. Some¬ 
thing violent aroused and accompanied the procession along its 
entire course: anger against a justice that was too severe or too 
indulgent; shouts against the detested criminals; movements in 
favour of prisoners one knew and greeted; confrontations with the 
police: ‘During the whole journey from the Fontainebleau barrier, 
groups of enraged spectators hurled insults at Delacollonge: Down 
