
39 




Torture 


body of the accused, the speaking and, if necessary, suffering body, 
assured the interlocking of these two mechanisms; that is why, 
until the classical system of punishment was re-examined from top 
to bottom, there were so few r^ical criticisms of torture (the most 
famous being Nicolas’s Si la tohure est im moyen a verifier les crimes 
of 1682). Much more frequent were simple recommendations of 
prudence: ‘Judicial torture is a dangerous means of arriving at 
knowledge of the truth; that is why judges must not resort to it with¬ 
out due consideration. Nothing is more equivocal. There are guilty 
men who have enough firmness to hide a true crime... and innocent 
victims who are made to confess crimes of which they were not 
guilty’ (Ferriere, 612). 

On this basis one may see the functioning of judicial torture, or 
interrogation under torture, as a torture of the truth. To begin with, 
judicial torture was not a way of obtaining the truth at all costs; it 
was not the unrestrained torture of modern interrogations; it was 
certainly cruel, but it was not savage. It was a regulated practice, 
obeying a well-defined procedure; the various stages, their duration, 
the instruments used, the length of ropes and the heaviness of the 
weights used, the number of interventions made by the interrogating 
magistrate, all this was, according to the different local practices, 
carefully codified (In 1729, Aguesseau ordered an investigation into 
the means and rules of torture used in France. For a summary of the 
findings, cf. Joly de Fleury, 322-8.) Torture was a strict judicial 
game. And, as such, it was linked to the old tests or trials - ordeals, 
judicial duels, judgements of God - that were practised in accusatory 
procedures long before the techniques of the Inquisition. Something 
of the joust survived, between the judge who ordered the judicial 
torture and the suspect who was tortured; the ‘patient’ - this is the 
term used to designate the victim - was subjected to a series of trials, 
graduated in severity, in which he succeeded if he ‘held out’, or 
failed if he confessed. (The first degree of torture was the sight of 
the instruments. In the case of children or of persons over the age 
of seventy, one did not go beyond this stage.) But the examining 
magistrate did not employ torture without himself taking certain 
risks (apart, that is, from the danger of causing the suspect’s death); 
he had a stake in the game, namely, the evidence that he had already 
collected; for the rule was that if the accused ‘held out’ and did not 


40 




The spectacle of the scaffold 


confess, the magistrate was forced to drop the charges. The tortured 
man had then won. Hence the custom, which had been introduced 
for the most serious cases, of imposing judicial torture ‘pending 
proof’: in this case the magistrate could continue with his investiga¬ 
tion after the torture had failed; the suspect was not declared 
innocent by his resistance; but at least his victory saved him from 
being condemned to death. The judge kept all his cards, except the 
principal one. Omnia citra morum. Hence the recommendation 
often made to magistrates, in the case of the most serious crimes, 
not to subject to judicial torture a suspect against whom the evidence 
was sufficiently convincing for, if he managed to resist the torture, 
the magistrate would no longer have the right to pass the death 
sentence, which he nevertheless deserved; in such a joust, justice 
would be the loser: if the evidence was sufficient ‘to condemn such a 
guilty person to death’, one should not ‘leave the conviction to 
chance and to the outcome of a provisional interrogation that often 
leads to nothing; for it is in the interest of public safety to make 
examples of grave, horrible and capital crimes’ (Rousseaud de la 
Combe, 503). 

Beneath an apparently determined, impatient search for truth, 
one finds in classical torture the regulated mechanism of an ordeal: 
a physical challenge that must define the truth; if the patient is 
guilty, the pains that it imposes are not unjust; but it is also a mark 
of exculpation if he is innocent. In the practice of torture, pain, 
confrontation and truth were bound together: they worked to¬ 
gether on the patient’s body. The search for truth through judicial 
torture was certainly a way of obtaining evidence, the most serious 
of all - the confession of the guilty person; but it was also the battle, 
and this victory of one adversary over the other, that ‘produced’ 
truth according to a ritual. In torture employed to extract a con¬ 
fession, there was an element of the investigation; there also was an 
element of the duel. 

It is as if investigation and punishment had become mixed. And 
this is not the least paradoxical thing about it. Judicial torture was 
indeed defined as a way of complementing the demonstration when 
‘there are not sufficient penalties in the trial’. For it was included 
among the penalties; it was a penalty so grave that, in the hierarchy 
of punishments, the ordinance of 1760 placed it immediately after 


