anomalies, infirmities, maladjustments, effects of environment or 
heredity; acts of aggression are punished, so also, through them, is 
aggressivity; rape, but at the same time perversions; murders, but 
also drives and desires. But, it will be objected, judgement is not 
actually being passed on them; if they are referred to at all it is to 
explain the actions in question, and to determine to what extent the 
the subject’s will was involved in the crime. This is no answer. For 
it is these shadows lurking behind the case itself that are judged and 
punished. They are judged indirectly as ‘attenuating circumstances’ 
that introduce into the verdict not only ‘circumstantial’ evidence. 


17 



Torture 


but something quite different, which is not juridically codifiable: 
the knowledge of the criminal, one’s estimation of him, what is 
known about the relations between him, his past and his crime, and 
what might be expected of him in the future. They are also judged 
by the interplay of all those notions that have circulated between 
medicine and jurisprudence since the nineteenth century (the ‘mon¬ 
sters’ of Georget’s times, Chaumie’s ‘psychical anomalies’, the 
‘perverts’ and ‘maladjusted’ of our own experts) and which, behind 
the pretext of explaining an action, are ways of defining an indivi¬ 
dual. They are punished by means of a punishment that has the 
function of making the offender ‘not only desirous, but also capable, 
of living within the law and of providing for his own needs’; they 
are punished by the internal economy of a penalty which, while 
intended to punish the crime, may be altered (shortened or, in 
certain cases, extended) according to changes in the prisoner’s 
behaviour; and they are punished by the ‘security measures’ that 
accompany the penalty (prohibition of entering certain areas, pro¬ 
bation, obligatory medical treatment), and which are intended not 
to punish the offence, but to supervise the individual, to neutralize 
his dangerous state of mind, to alter his criminal tendencies, and to 
continue even when this change has been achieved. The criminal’s 
soul is not referred to in the trial merely to explain his crime and 
as a factor in the juridical apportioning of responsibility; if it is 
brought before the court, with such pomp and circumstance, such 
concern to understand and such ‘scientific’ application, it is because 
it too, as well as the crime itself, is to be judged and to share in the 
punishment. Throughout the penal ritual, from the preliminary 
investigation to the sentence and the final effects of the penalty, a 
domain has been penetrated by objects that not only duplicate, but 
also dissociate the juridically defined and coded objects. Psychiatric 
expertise, but also in a more general way criminal anthropology and 
