
4. In discipline, punishment is only one element of a double 
system: gratification-punishment. And it is this system that operates 
in the process of training and correction. The teacher ‘must avoid, 
as far as possible, the use of punishment; on the contrary, he must 
endeavour to make rewards more frequent than penalties, the lazy 
being more encouraged by the desire to be rewarded in the same 
way as the diligent than by the fear of punishment; that is why it 
will be very beneficial, when the teacher is obliged to use punish¬ 
ment, to win the heart of the child if he can before doing so’ (Demia, 
17). This mechanism with two elements makes possible a number 
of operations characteristic of disciplinary penality. First, the 
definition of behaviour and performance on the basis of the two 
opposed values of good and evil; instead of the simple division of 
the prohibition, as practised in penal justice, we have a distribu¬ 
tion between a positive pole and a negative pole; all behaviour falls 
in the field between good and bad marks, good and bad points. 
Moreover, it is possible to quantify this field and work out an 
arithmetical economy based on it. A penal accountancy, constantly 
brought up to date, makes it possible to obtain the punitive balance- 
sheet of each individual. School ‘justice’, rudiments of which are to 
be found in the army and the workshops, carried this system very 
far. The Brothers of the Christian Schools organized a whole micro¬ 
economy of privileges and impositions; ‘Privileges may be used by 
pupils to gain exemption from penances which have been imposed 
on them. . . For example, a pupil may have been given four or six 
catechism questions to copy out as an imposition; he will be able to 
gain exemption from this penance by accumulating a certain number 
of privilege points; the teacher will assign the number for each 
question. . . Since privileges are worth a certain number of points, 
the teacher also has others of less value, which serve as small change 


180 




The means of correct training 


for the first. For example, a child has an imposition from which he 
can redeem himself with six points; he earns a privilege of ten; 
he presents it to the teacher who gives him back four points, and so 
on’ (La Salle, Condtute ..., i56fF). What we have here is a transposi¬ 
tion of the system of indulgences. And by the play of this quantifica¬ 
tion, this circulation of awards and debits, thanks to the continuous 
calculation of plus and minus points, the disciplinary apparatuses 
hierarchized the ‘good’ and the ‘bad’ subjects in relation , to one 
another. Through this micro-economy of a perpetual penality 
