would have at least an opportunity of making discoveries in the 
domain of metaphysics. The Panopticon is a privileged place for 
experiments on men, and for analysing with complete certainty the 
transformations that may be obtained from them. The Panopticon 
may even provide an apparatus for supervising its own mechanisms. 
In this central tower, the director may spy on all the employees that 
he has under his orders: nurses, doctors, foremen, teachers, war¬ 
ders; he will be able to judge them continuously, alter their be¬ 
haviour, impose upon them the methods he thinks best; and it will 
even be possible to observe the director himself. An inspector 
arriving unexpectedly at the centre of the Panopticon will be able to 
judge at a glance, without anything being concealed from him, how 
the entire establishment is functioning. And, in any case, enclosed 
as he is in the middle of this architectural mechanism, is not the 
director’s own fate entirely bound up with it.^ The incompetent 
physician who has allowed contagion to spread, the incompetent 
prison governor or workshop manager will be the first victims of an 
epidemic or a revolt. ‘ “By every tie I could devise’’, said the master 
of the Panopticon, “my own fate had been bound up by me with 
theirs” ’ (Bentham, 177). The Panopticon functions as a kind of 
laboratory of power. Thanks to its mechanisms of observation, it 
gains in efficiency and in the ability to penetrate into men’s beha¬ 
viour; knowledge follows the advances of power, discovering new 
objects of knowledge over all the surfaces on which power is 
exercised. 


204 




Panopticism 


The plague-stricken town, the panoptic establishment - the 
differences are important. They mark, at a distance of a century and 
a half, the transformations of the disciplinary programme. In the 
first case, there is an exceptional situation: against an extraordinary 
evil, power is mobilized; it makes itself everywhere present and 
visible; it invents new mechanisms; it separates, it immobilizes, it 
partitions; it constructs for a time what is both a counter-city and 
the perfect society; it imposes an ideal functioning, but one that is 
reduced, in the final analysis, like the evil that it combats, to a simple 
dualism of life and death: that which moves brings death, and one 
kills that which moves. The Panopticon, on the other hand, must 
be understood as a generalizable model of functioning; a way of 
defining power relations in terms of the everyday life of men. No 
doubt Bentham presents it as a particular institution, closed in upon 
itself. Utopias, perfectly closed in upon themselves, are common 
enough. As opposed to the ruined prisons, littered with mechanisms 
of torture, to be seen in Piranese’s engravings, the Panopticon 
presents a cruel, ingenious cage. The fact that it should have given 
rise, even in our own time, to so many variations, projected or 
realized, is evidence of the imaginary intensity that it has possessed 
for almost two hundred years. But the Panopticon must not be 
understood as a dream building: it is the diagram of a mechanism of 
power reduced to its ideal form; its functioning, abstracted from any 
obstacle, resistance or friction, must be represented as a pure archi¬ 
tectural and optical system: it is in fact a figure of political technology 
that may and must be detached from any specific use. 

It is polyvalent in its applications; it serves to reform prisoners, 
but also to treat patients, to instruct schoolchildren, to confine the 
insane, to supervise workers, to put beggars and idlers to work. It is 
a type of location of bodies in space, of distribution of individuals 
in relation to one another, of hierarchical organization, of disposi¬ 
tion of centres and channels of power, of definition of the instru¬ 
ments and modes of intervention of power, which can be implemen¬ 
ted in hospitals, workshops, schools, prisons. Whenever one is 
dealing with a multiplicity of individuals on whom a task or a 
particular form of behaviour must be imposed, the panoptic schema 
may be used. It is - necessary modifications apart - applicable ‘to 
all establishments whatsoever, in which, within a space not too large 


205 




Discipline 


to be covered or commanded by buildings, a number of persons are 
meant to be kept under inspection’ (Bentham, 40; although Bentham 
takes the penitentiary house as his prime example, it is because it has 
many different functions to fulfil - safe custody, confinement, 
solitude, forced labour and instruction). 

In each of its applications, it makes it possible to perfect the exer¬ 
cise of power. It does this in several ways: because it can reduce the 
number of those who exercise it, while increasing the number of 
those on whom it is exercised. Because it is possible to intervene at 
any moment and because the constant pressure acts even before the 
offences, mistakes or crimes have been committed. Because, in these 
conditions, its strength is that it never intervenes, it is exercised 
spontaneously and without noise, it constitutes a mechanism whose 
effects follow from one another. Because, without any physical 
instrument other than architecture and geometry, it acts directly on 
