Linguet, 8.) But the same imperative need for a total coincidence 
between all possible offences and the effects-signs of punishment 
forces one to go further. The idea of the same punishment does not 
have the same effect on everyone: the rich do not fear fines nor the 
notorious infamy. The injury caused by an offence and its value as 
example differ according to the status of the offender; a crime 
committed by a noble is more injurious to society than one com¬ 
mitted by a man of the people (Lacretelle, 144). Lastly, since punish¬ 
ment must prevent a repetition of the offence, it must take into 
account the profound nature of the criminal himself, the presumable 
degree of his wickedness, the intrinsic quality of his will; ‘Of two 
men who have committed the same theft, how much less guilty is he 
who scarcely had the necessities of life than he who overflowed with 
excess.^ Of two perjurers, how much more criminal is he on whom 
one has striven from his childhood to impress feelings of honour 
than he who, abandoned to nature, never received the benefit of 
education’ (Marat, 34). One sees the emergence at the same time of 


98 




Generalized punishment 


the need for a parallel classification of crimes and punishments, the 
need for an individualization of sentences, in accordance with the 
particular characteristics of each criminal. This individualization was 
to weigh very heavily throughout the history of modern penal law; 
it is rooted precisely here: in terms of the theory of law and accord¬ 
ing to the requirements of everyday practice, it is no doubt in 
radical opposition to the principle of codification; but from the 
standpoint of the economy of the power to punish, and of the 
techniques by which one wishes to circulate throughout the social 
body precisely calibrated signs of punishment, with neither excesses 
nor loopholes, with neither a useless ‘expenditure’ of power nor with 
timidity, it becomes evident that the codification of the offences- 
punishments system and the modulation of the criminal-punish¬ 
ment dyad go side by side, each requiring the other. Individualiza¬ 
tion appears as the ultimate aim of a precisely adapted code. 

But this individualization is very different in its nature from the 
modulations of punishment to be found in the old jurisprudence. 
The old system - and on this point it followed Christian peniten¬ 
tiary practice - used two series of variables to adjust the punishment, 
those of‘circumstances’ and those of‘intention’; elements, that is to 
say, that made it possible to qualify the act itself. The modulation 
of the penalty belonged to ‘casuistry’ in the broad sense. (On the 
non-individualizing character of casuistry, cf. Cariou.) But what 
was now beginning to emerge was a modulation that referred to the 
defendant himself, to his nature, to his way of life and his attitude of 
mind, to his past, to the ‘quality’ and not to the intention of his will. 
One perceives, but as a place as yet unfilled, the locus in which, in 
penal practice, psychological knowledge will take over the role of 
casuistic jurisprudence. Of course, at the end of the eighteenth 
century, that moment was still far off. The code-individualization 
link was sought in the scientific models of the period. Natural 
history no doubt offered the most adequate schema: the taxonomy 
of species according to an uninterrupted gradation. One sought to 
constitute a Linnaeus of crimes and punishments, so that each 
particular offence and each punishable individual might come, with¬ 
out the slightest risk of any arbitrary action, within the provisions 
of a general law. ‘A table must be drawn up of all the genera of 
crimes to be observed in different countries. According to the 


99 




Punishment 


enumeration of crimes, a division into species must be carried out. 
The best rule of this division is, it seems to me, to separate the 
crimes according to their objects. This division must be such that 
each species is quite distinct from another, and that each particular 
crime, considered in all its relations may be placed between that 
which must precede it and that which must follow it, in the strictest 
gradation; lastly, this table must be such that it may be compared 
with another table that will be drawn up for penalties, in such a way 
that they may correspond exactly to one another’ (Lacretelle, 351- 
352). In theory, or rather in dream, the double taxonomy of 
punishments and crimes will solve the problem: but how is one to 
apply fixed laws to particular individuals.^ 

Far removed from this speculative model, forms of anthropologi¬ 
cal individualization were being constituted at the same period in 
what was still a very rough and ready way. Let us take first the 
notion of the repetition of crime. Not that this was unknown to the 
old criminal laws.^i But it was tending to become a description 
of the defendant himself capable of altering the sentence passed: 
according to the legislation of 1791, recidivists were liable in almost 
all cases to a doubling of the penalty; according to the law of Floreal 
Year X, they had to be branded with the letter R; and the penal code 
of 1810 inflicted on them either the maximum possible of the normal 
penalty, or the penalty immediately above it. Now, through the 
