warfare. Gradually - but especially after 1762 - the educational 
space unfolds; the class becomes homogeneous, it is no longer made 
up of individual elements arranged side by side under the master’s 
eye. In the eighteenth century, ‘rank’ begins to define the great form 
of distribution of individuals in the educational order: rows or ranks 
of pupils in the class, corridors, courtyards; rank attributed to each 
pupil at the end of each task and each examination; the rank he 



Docile bodies 


obtains from week to week, month to month, year to year; an 
alignment of age groups, one after another; a succession of subjects 
taught and questions treated, according to an order of increasing 
difficulty. And, in this ensemble of compulsory alignments, each 
pupil, according to his age, his performance, his behaviour, occupies 
sometimes one rank, sometimes another; he moves constantly over 
a series of compartments - some of these are ‘ideal’ compartments, 
marking a hierarchy of knowledge or ability, others express the 
distribution of values or merits in material terms in the space of the 
college or classroom. It is a perpetual movement in which individuals 
replace one another in a space marked off by aligned intervals. 

The organization of a serial space was one of the great technical 
mutations of elementary education. It made it possible to supersede 
the traditional system (a pupil working for a few minutes with the 
master, while the rest of the heterogeneous group remained idle and 
unattended). By assigning individual places it made possible the 
supervision of each individual and the simultaneous work of all. It 
organized a new economy of the time of apprenticeship. It made the 
educational space function like a learning machine, but also as a 
machine for supervising, hierarchizing, rewarding. Jean-Baptiste de 
La Salle dreamt of a classroom in which the spatial distribution 
might provide a whole series of distinctions at once: according to 
the pupils’ progress, worth, character, application, cleanliness and 
parents’ fortune. Thus, the classroom would form a single great 
table, with many different entries, under the scrupulously ‘classi- 
ficatory’ eye of the master: ‘In every class there will be places 
assigned for all the pupils of all the lessons, so that all those attending 
the same lesson will always occupy the same place. Pupils attending 
the highest lessons will be placed in the benches closest to the wall, 
followed by the others according to the order of the lessons moving 
towards the middle of the classroom. . . Each of the pupils will 
have his place assigned to him and none of them will leave it or 
change it except on the order or with the consent of the school 
inspector.’ Things must be so arranged that ‘those whose parents 
are neglectful and verminous must be separated from those who are 
careful and clean; that an unruly and frivolous pupil should be 
