
ficial training; a change of ‘morality’, rather than of attitude. In the 
Pennsylvanian prison, the only operations of correction were the 
conscience and the silent architecture that confronted it. At Cherry 
Hill, ‘the walls are the punishment of the crime; the cell confronts 
the convict with himself; he is forced to listen to his conscience’. 
Hence work there is more in the nature of a consolation than an 
obligation; supervisors do not have to exert force - this is assured 
by the materiality of things - and consequently, their authority may 
be accepted: ‘At each visit, a few benevolent words flow from this 
honest mouth and bring to the heart of the inmate gratitude, hope 
and consolation; he loves his warder; and he loves him because he 
is gentle and sympathetic. Walls are terrible, but man is good’ 
(Blouet). In this closed cell, this temporary sepulchre, the myths of 
resurrection arise easily enough. After night and silence, the regener¬ 
ated life. Auburn was society itself reduced to its bare essentials. 
Cherry Hill was life annihilated and begun again. Catholicism soon 
absorbed this Quaker technique into its discourses. ‘I see your cell 
as no more than a frightful sepulchre where, instead of worms, 
remorse and despair come to gnaw at you and to turn your existence 
into a hell in anticipation. But... what is for an irreligious prisoner 
merely a tomb, a repulsive ossuary, becomes, for the sincerely 
Christian convict, the very cradle of blessed immortality.’® 

A whole series of different conflicts stemmed from the opposition 
between these two models: religious (must conversion be the princi¬ 
pal element of correction.^), medical (does total isolation drive 
convicts insane?), economic (which method costs less?), architec¬ 
tural and administrative (which form guarantees the best surveil¬ 
lance?). This, no doubt, was why the argument lasted so long. But, 
at the heart of the debate, and making it possible, was this primary 
objective of carceral action: coercive individualization, by the 
termination of any relation that is not supervised by authority or 
arranged according to hierarchy. 

2. ‘Work alternating with meals accompanies the convict to 
evening prayer; then a new sleep gives him an agreeable rest that is 
not disturbed by the phantoms of an unregulated imagination. Thus 
the six weekdays pass by. They are followed by a day devoted 
exclusively to prayer, instruction and salutary meditations. Thus 
the weeks, the months, the years follow one another; thus the 




Prison 


prisoner who, on entering the establishment, was an inconstant 
man, or one who was single-minded only in his irregularity, seeking 
