triumph of justice, it is also the triumph of liberty, for then penalties 
no longer proceed from the will of the legislator, but from the nature 
of things; one no longer sees man committing violence on man’ 
(Marat, 33). In analogical punishment, the power that punishes is 
hidden. 

The reformers proposed a whole panoply of penalties that were 
natural by institution and which represented in their form the 
content of the crime. Take Vermeil, for example: those who abuse 
public liberty will be deprived of their own; those who abuse the 
benefits of law and the privileges of public office will be deprived of 
their civil rights; speculation and usury will be punished by fines; 
theft will be punished by confiscation; ‘vainglory’ by humiliation; 
murder by death; fire-raising by the stake. In the case of the poi¬ 
soner, ‘the executioner will present him with a goblet the contents 
of which will be thrown into his face; thus he will be made to feel 
the horror of his crime by being offered an image of it; he will then 
be thrown into a cauldron of boiling water’ (Vermeil, 68-145; cf. 
also Dufriche de Valaze, 349) Mere day-dreaming.^ Perhaps. But 
the principle of a symbolic communication was clearly formulated 
by Le Peletier, when in 1791 he presented the new criminal legisla¬ 
tion: ‘Exact relations are required between the nature of the offence 
and the nature of the punishment’; he who has used violence in his 
crime must be subjected to physical pain; he who has been lazy 
must be sentenced to hard labour; he who has acted despicably will 
be subjected to infamy (Le Peletier, 321-2). 

Despite cruelties that are strongly reminiscent of the tortures of 
the Ancien Regime, a quite different mechanism is at work in these 
analogical penalties. Horror is not opposed to horror in a joust of 


105 



Punishment 


power; it is no longer the symmetry of vengeance, but the trans¬ 
parency of the sign to that which it signifies; what is required is to 
establish, in the theatre of punishments, a relation that is immedi¬ 
ately intelligible to the senses and on which a simple .calculation may 
be based: a sort of reasonable aesthetic of punishment. ‘It is not only 
in the fine arts that one must follow nature faithfully; political 
institutions, at least those that display wisdom and permanence, are 
founded on nature’ (Beccaria, 114). The punishment must proceed 
from the crime; the law must appear to be a necessity of things, and 
power must act while concealing itself beneath the gentle force of 
nature. 

2. This complex of signs must engage with the mechanics of 
forces: reduce the desire that makes the crime attractive; increase 
the interest that makes the penalty be feared; reverse the relation of 
intensities, so that the representation of the penalty and its dis¬ 
advantages is more lively than that of the crime and its pleasures. 
There is a whole mechanics, therefore, of interest, of its movement, 
of the way that one represents it to oneself and of the liveliness of 
this representation. ‘The legislator must be a skilful architect who 
knows how to employ all the forces that may contribute to the 
solidity of the building and reduce all those that might ruin it’ 
(Beccaria, 135). 

There are several ways of achieving this. ‘Go straight to the 
source of evil’ (Mably, 246). Smash the mainspring that animates the 
representation of the crime. Weaken the interest that brought it to 
birth. Behind the offences of the vagabond, there is laziness; that 
is what one must fight against. ‘One will not succeed by locking 
beggars up in filthy prisons that are more like cesspools’; they will 
have to be forced to work. ‘The best way of punishing them is to 
employ them’ (Brissot, 258). Against a bad passion, a good habit; 
against a force, another force, but it must be the force of sensibility 
and passion, not that of armed power. ‘Must one not deduce all 
penalties from this principle, which is so simple, so appropriate and 
already well known, namely, to choose them in that which is most 
subduing for the passion that led to the crime committed.^’ (Lacre- 
telle, 361). 

Set the force that drove the criminal to the crime against itself. 
Divide interest, use it to make the penalty something to be feared. 


106 



The gentle way in punishment 


Let the punishment irritate it and stimulate it more than the crime 
was able to flatter it. If pride led to the committing of a crime, let 
it be hurt, let the punishment disgust it. Shameful punishments are 
effective because they are based on the vanity that was at the root 
of the crime. Fanatics glory both in their opinions and in the tor¬ 
tures that they endure for them. Let us, therefore, set against 
fanaticism the proud obstinacy that sustains it: ‘Reduce it with 
ridicule and shame; if one humiliates the proud vanity of fanatics 
before a great crowd of spectators, one may expect happy effects 
from this punishment.’ It would be quite useless, on the other hand, 
to impose physical pain on them. (Beccaria, 113). 
