rather than a contract regulating a transaction or the conquest of a 
territory. In short this power is exercised rather than possessed; 
it is not the ‘privilege’, acquired or preserved, of the dominant 
class, but the overall effect of its strategic positions - an effect that 


z 6 




The body of the condemned 


is manifested and sometimes extended by the position of those who 
are dominated. Furthermore, this power is not exercised simply as 
an obligation or a prohibition on those who ‘do not have it’; it 
invests them, is transmitted by them and through them; it exerts 
pressure upon them, just as they themselves, in their struggle against 
it, resist the grip it has on them. This means that these relations go 
right down into the depths of society, that they are not localized in 
the relations between the state and its citizens or on the frontier 
between classes and that they do not merely reproduce, at the level 
of individuals, bodies, gestures and behaviour, the general form of 
the law or government; that, although there is continuity (they are 
indeed articulated on this form through a whole series of complex 
mechanisms), there is neither analogy nor homology, but a specific¬ 
ity of mechanism and modality. Lastly, they are not univocal; they 
define innumerable points of confrontation, focuses of instability, 
each of which has its own risks of conflict, of struggles, and of an 
at least temporary inversion of the power relations. The overthrow 
of these ‘micro-powers’ does not, then, obey the law of all or 
nothing; it is not acquired once and for all by a new control of the 
apparatuses nor by a new functioning or a destruction of the in¬ 
stitutions; on the other hand, none of its localized episodes may be 
inscribed in history except by the effects that it induces on the entire 
network in which it is caught up. 

Perhaps, too, we should abandon a whole tradition that allows 
us to imagine that knowledge can exist only where the power rela¬ 
tions are suspended and that knowledge can develop only outside its 
injunctions, its demands and its interests. Perhaps we should aban¬ 
don the belief that power makes mad and that, by the same token, 
the renunciation of power is one of the conditions of knowledge. 
We should admit rather that power produces knowledge (and not 
simply by encouraging it because it serves power or by applying it 
because it is useful); that power and knowledge directly imply one 
another; that there is no power relation without the correlative 
constitution of a field of knowledge, nor any knowledge that does 
not presuppose and constitute at the same time power relations. 
These ‘power-knowledge relations’ are to be analysed, therefore, 
not on the basis of a subject of knowledge who is or is not free in 
relation to the power system, but, on the contrary, the subject who 


27 




Torture 


knows, the objects to be known and the modalities of knowledge 
must be regarded as so many effects of these fundamental implica¬ 
tions of power-knowledge and their historical transformations. In 
short, it is not the activity of the subject of knowledge that pro¬ 
duces a corpus of knowledge, useful or resistant to power, but 
power-knowledge, the processes and struggles that traverse it and 
of which it is made up, that determines the forms and possible 
domains of knowledge. 

To analyse the political investment of the body and the micro¬ 
physics of power presupposes, therefore, that one abandons - where 
power is concerned - the violence-ideology opposition, the meta¬ 
phor of property, the model of the contract or of conquest; that - 
where knowledge is concerned - one abandons the opposition 
between what is ‘interested’ and what is ‘disinterested’, the model of 
knowledge and the primacy of the subject. Borrowing a word from 
Petty and his contemporaries, but giving it a different meaning from 
the one current in the seventeenth century, one might imagine a 
political ‘anatomy’. This would not be the study of a state in terms of 
a ‘body’ (with its elements, its resources and its forces), nor would 
it be the study of the body and its surroundings in terms of a small 
state. One would be concerned with the ‘body politic’, as a set of 
material elements and techniques that serve as weapons, relays, 
communication routes and supports for the power and knowledge 
relations that invest human bodies and subjugate them by turning 
them into objects of knowledge. 

It is a question of situating the techniques of punishment - 
whether they seize the body in the ritual of public torture and 
execution or whether they are addressed to the soul - in the history 
of this body politic; of considering penal practices less as a conse¬ 
quence of legal theories than as a chapter of political anatomy. 

Kantorowitz gives a remarkable analysis of ‘The King’s Body’: 
a double body according to the juridical theology of the Middle 
Ages, since it involves not only the transitory element that is born 
and dies, but another that remains unchanged by time and is main¬ 
