did not have a single origin. It was not the more enlightened mem¬ 
bers of the public, nor the philosophes, who regarded themselves as 
enemies of despotism and friends of mankind; it was not even the 
social groups opposed to the parlementaires who instigated the 
reform. Or rather it was not they alone; in this same overall project 
of a new distribution of the power to punish, and of a new distribu¬ 
tion of its effects, many different interests came together. The reform 
was not prepared outside the legal machinery and against all its 
representatives; it was prepared, for the most part, from within, by 
a large number of magistrates and on the basis of shared objectives 
and the power conflicts that divided them. Certainly the reformers 
did not form a majority of the magistrates; but it was a body of 
lawyers who outlined its general principles: a power to judge that 
would not be affected by the immediate exercise of the prince’s 
sovereignty; that would be relieved of any claim to legislate; that 
would be detached from property relations; and which, having no 
other functions but to judge, would exercise that power to the full. 
In short, the power to judge should no longer depend on the 
innumerable, discontinuous, sometimes contradictory privileges of 
sovereignty, but on the continuously distributed effects of public 
power. This general principle defined an overall strategy that 
covered many different struggles. Those of philosophers like 
Voltaire and of publicists like Brissot or Marat; but also those of 
magistrates whose interests were nevertheless very diverse: Le 
Trosne, a judge at the presidial court of Orleans, and Lacretelle, the 
advocate-general at the parlement; Target, who with the parlements 
was opposed to Maupeou’s reform; but also J. N. Moreau, who 
supported the royal power against the parlementaires-, Servan and 
Dupaty, both magistrates, but in conflict with their colleagues, etc. 

Throughout the eighteenth century, inside and outside the legal 
apparatus, in both everyday penal practice and the criticism of 
institutions, one sees the emergence of a new strategy for the 


8i 




Punishment 


exercise of the power to punish. And ‘reform’, in the strict sense, as 
it was formulated in the theories of law or as it was outlined in the 
various projects, was the political or philosophical resumption of 
this strategy, with its primary objectives: to make of the punishment 
and repression of illegalities a regular function, coextensive with 
society; not to punish less, but to punish better; to punish with an 
attenuated severity perhaps, but in order to punish with more 
