therefore bring all his attention to bear on this object; it is a question 
both of discipline and economy. The more accurate and easy the 
surveillance, the less need will there be to seek in the strength of the 
building guarantees against attempted escape and communication 
between the inmates. But surveillance will be perfect if from a central 
hall the director or head-warder sees, without moving and without 
b«ng seen, not only the entrances of all the cells and even the inside 
of most of them when the unglazed door is open, but also the 
warders guarding the prisoners on every floor... With the formula 
of circular or semi-circular prisons, it would be possible to see from 
a single centre all the prisoners in their cells and the warders in the 
inspection galleries’ (Ducatel, 9). 

But the penitentiary Panopticon was also a system of individual¬ 
izing and permanent documentation. The same year in which 
variants of the Benthamite schema were recommended for the 
building of prisons, the system of ‘moral accounting’ was made 
compulsory: an individual report of a uniform kind in every prison, 
on which the governor or head-warder, the chaplain and the 
instructor had to fill in their observations on each inmate: ‘It is in a 
way the vade mecum of prison administration, making it possible to 
assess each case, each circumstance and, consequently, to know 
what treatment to apply to each prisoner individually’ (Ducpetiaux, 
56-7). Many other, much more complete, systems of recording were 
planned or tried out (cf., for example, Gregory, i99ff; Grellet- 
Wammy, 23-5 and 199-203). The overall aim was to make the 
prison a place for the constitution of a body of knowledge that 
would regulate the exercise of penitentiary practice. The prison has 
not only to know the decision of the judges and to apply it in terms 


250 




Complete and austere institutions 


of the established regulations: it has to extract unceasingly from the 
inmate a body of knowledge that will make it possible to transform 
the penal measure into a penitentiary operation; which will make of 
the penalty required by the offence a modification of the inmate that 
will be of use to society. The autonomy of the carceral regime and 
the knowledge that it creates make it possible to increase the utility 
of the penalty, which the code had made the very principle of its 
punitive philosophy: ‘The governor must not lose sight of a single 
inmate, because in whatever part of the prison the inmate is to be 
found, whether he is entering or leaving, or whether he is staying 
there, the governor must also justify the motives for his staying in 
a particular classification or for his movement from one to another. 
He is a veritable accountant. Each inmate is for him, in the sphere 
of individual education, a capital invested with penitentiary interest’ 
(Lucas, II, 449-50). As a highly efficient technology, penitentiary 
practice produces a return on the capital invested in the penal system 
and in the building of heavy prisons. 

Similarly, the offender becomes an individual to know. This 
demand for knowledge was not, in the first instance, inserted into 
the legislation itself, in order to provide substance for the sentence 
and to determine the true degree of guilt. It is as a convict, as a point 
of application for punitive mechanisms, that the offender is con¬ 
stituted himself as the object of possible knowledge. 

But this implies that the penitentiary apparatus, with the whole 
technological programme that accompanies it, brings about a 
curious substitution: from the hands of justice, it certainly receives 
a convicted person; but what it must apply itself to is not, of course, 
the offence, nor even exactly the offender, but a rather different 
object, one defined by variables which at the outset at least were not 
taken into account in the sentence, for they were relevant only for 
a corrective technology. This other character, whom the peniten¬ 
tiary apparatus substitutes for the convicted offender, is the 
delinquent. 

The delinquent is to be distinguished from the offender by the 
fact that it is not so much his act as his life that is relevant in char¬ 
acterizing him. The penitentiary operation, if it is to be a genuine 
re-education, must become the sum total existence of the delinquent, 
making of the prison a sort of artificial and coercive theatre in which 


251 




Prison 


his life will be examined from top to bottom. The legal punishment 
bears upon an act; the punitive technique on a life; it falls to this 
punitive technique, therefore, to reconstitute all the sordid detail of 
a life in the form of knowledge, to fill in the gaps of that knowledge 
and to act upon it by a practice of compulsion. It is a biographical 
knowledge and a technique for correcting individual lives. The 
observation of the delinquent ‘should go back not only to the 
circumstances, but also to the causes of his crime; they must be 
sought in the story of his life, from the triple point of view of 
psychology, social position and upbringing, in order to discover the 
