it.^ ‘Poison, fire-raising and sometimes even revolt are evidence of 
the terrible miseries of the social condition’ {La Phalange, 10 
January 1837). And what of the prisoners, ‘the most unfortunate 
and most oppressed part of mankind’.^ La Phalange sometimes 
shared the contemporary aesthetic of crime, but in a very different 
cause. 

Hence a use of fait divers that was intended not only to turn the 
reproach of immorality back upon the adversary, but to reveal the 


289 



Prison 


play of opposing forces. La Phalange analyses penal affairs as a 
confrontation coded by ‘civilization’, the great crimes not as 
monstrosities, but as the fatal return and revolt of what is repressed,*® 
the minor illegalities not as the necessary margins of society, but as 
a rumbling from the midst of the battle-field. 

After Vidocq and Lacenaire, a third character must be introduced. 
He made only a short appearance; his notoriety lasted hardly more 
than a day. He was merely the passing figure of minor illegalities: a 
child of thirteen, without home or family, charged with vagabond¬ 
age and whom a two-year sentence had no doubt long placed in the 
circuits of delinquency. He would certainly have passed without 
trace, had he not opposed to the discourse of the law that made him 
delinquent (in the name of the disciplines, even more than in the 
terms of the code) the discourse of an illegality that remained resist¬ 
ant to these coercions and which revealed indiscipline in a systematic¬ 
ally ambiguous manner as the disordered order of society and as the 
affirmation of inalienable rights. All the illegalities that the court 
defined as offences the accused reformulated as the affirmation of a 
living force: the lack of a home as vagabondage, the lack of a master 
as independence, the lack of work as freedom, the lack of a time-table 
as the fullness of days and nights. This confrontation of illegality 
with the discipline-penality-delinquency system was perceived by 
contemporaries or rather by the journalist who happened to be there 
as the comic effect of the criminal law at grips with the petty details 
of indiscipline. And it was true: the affair itself and the verdict that 
followed represented the heart of the problem of legal punishment 
in the nineteenth century. The irony with which the judge tried to 
envelop indiscipline in the majesty of the law and the insolence 
with which the accused reinscribed indiscipline among the funda¬ 
mental rights represent for penality an exemplary scene. 

This, no doubt, is the value of the account published in the 
Gaiette des tribunaux for August 1840: ‘The judge: One must sleep 
at home. — Beasse: Have I got a home.^ - You live in perpetual vaga¬ 
bondage. - I work to earn my living. - What is your station in 
life.^ - My station: to begin with. I’m thirty-six at least; I don’t work 
for anybody. I’ve worked for myself for a long time now. I have my 
day station and my night station. In the day, for instance, I hand out 
leaflets free of charge to all the passers-by; I run after the stage- 


290 



Illegalities and delinquency 


coaches when they arrive and carry luggage for the passengers; I 
turn cart-wheels on the avenue de Neuilly; at night there are the 
shows; I open coach doors, I sell pass-out tickets; I’ve plenty to do. 

- It would be better for you to be put into a good house as an 
apprentice and learn a trade. - Oh, a good house, an apprenticeship, 
it’s too much trouble. And anyway the bourgeois ... always 
grumbling, no freedom. - Does not your father wish to reclaim you.^ 

- Haven’t got no father. - And your mother.^ - No mother neither, 
no parents, no friends, free and independent.’ Hearing his sentence 
of two years in a reformatory, Beasse ‘pulled an ugly face, then, 
recovering his good humour, remarked: “Two years, that’s never 
more than twenty-four months. Let’s be off, then.’’ ’ 

It was this scene that La Phalange took up. And the importance 
that the newspaper gave it, the extremely slow, careful analysis, 
shows that the Fourierists saw in such an everyday affair a play of 
fundamental forces. On the one hand, that of ‘civilization’, repre¬ 
sented by the judge, ‘living legality, the spirit and letter of the law’. 
It had its own system of coercion, which seemed to be the code, 
but which in fact was discipline. There had to be a place, a location, 
a compulsory insertion: ‘One sleeps at home, said the judge, because 
in fact, for him, everything must have a home, some dwelling, how¬ 
ever magnificent or mean; his task is not to provide one, but to 
force every individual to live in one.’ Moreover, one must have a 
station in life, a recognizable identity, an individuality fixed once 
and for all: ‘What is your station.^ This question is the simplest 
expression of the established order in society; such vagabondage is 
repugnant to it, disturbs it; one must have a stable, continuous long¬ 
term station, thoughts of the future, of a secure future, in order to 
reassure it against all attacks.’ In short, one should have a master, 
be caught up and situated within a hierarchy; one exists only when 
