spectacle. ‘To render accessible to a multitude of men the inspection 
of a small number of objects’: this was the problem to which the 
architecture of temples, theatres and circuses responded. With 
spectacle, there was a predominance of public life, the intensity of 
festivals, sensual proximity. In these rituals in which blood flowed, 
society found new vigour and formed for a moment a single great 
body. The modem age poses the opposite problem: ‘To procure 
for a small number, or even for a single individual, the instantaneous 
view of a great multitude.’ In a society in which the principal 
elements are no longer the community and public life, but, on the 
one hand, private individuals and, on the other, the state, relations 
can be regulated only in a form that is the exact reverse of the 
spectacle: ‘It was to the modern age, to the ever-growing influence 
of the state, to its ever more profound intervention in all the details 


216 




Panopticism 


and all the relations of social life, that was reserved the task of 
increasing and perfecting its guarantees, by using aind directing 
towards that great aim the building and distribution of buildings 
intended to observe a great multitude of men at the same time.’ 

Julius saw as a fulfilled historical process that which Bentham had 
described as a technical programme. Our society is one not of 
spectacle, but of surveillance; under the surface of images, one 
invests bodies in depth; behind the great abstraction of exchange, 
there continues the meticulous, concrete training of useful forces; 
the circuits of communication are the supports of an accumulation 
and a centralization of knowledge; the play of signs defines the 
anchorages of power; it is not that the beautiful totality of the 
individual is amputated, repressed, altered by our social order, it is 
rather that the individual is carefully fabricated in it, according to a 
whole technique of forces and bodies. We are much less Greeks than 
we believe. We are neither in the amphitheatre, nor on the stage, 
but in the panoptic machine, invested by its effects of power, which 
we bring to ourselves since we are part of its mechanism. The 
importance, in historical mythology, of the Napoleonic character 
probably derives from the fact that it is at the point of junction of 
the monarchical, ritual exercise of sovereignty and the hierarchical, 
permanent exercise of indefinite discipline. He is the individual who 
looms over everything with a single gaze which no detail, however 
minute, can escape: ‘You may consider that no part of the Empire 
is without surveillance, no crime, no offence, no contravention that 
remains unpunished, and that the eye of the genius who can en¬ 
lighten all embraces the whole of this vast machine, without, how¬ 
ever, the slightest detail escaping his attention’ (Treilhard, 14). At 
the moment of its full blossoming, the disciplinary society still 
assumes with the Emperor the old aspect of the power of spectacle. 
As a monarch who is at one and the same time a usurper of the 
ancient throne and the organizer of the new state, he combined 
into a single symbolic, ultimate figure the whole of the long process 
by which the pomp of sovereignty, the necessarily spectacular 
manifestations of power, were extinguished one by one in the daily 
exercise of surveillance, in a panopticism in which the vigilance of 
intersecting gazes was soon to render useless both the eagle and 
the sun. 


217 



Discipline 


The formation of the disciplinary society is connected with a 
number of broad historical processes - economic, juridico-political 
and, lastly, scientific - of which it forms part. 

I. Generally speaking, it might be said that the disciplines are 
techniques for assuring the ordering of human multiplicities. It is 
true that there is nothing exceptional or even characteristic in this; 
every system of power is presented with the same problem. But the 
peculiarity of the disciplines is that they try to define in relation to 
the multiplicities a tactics of power that fulfils three criteria: firstly, 
to obtain the exercise of power at the lowest possible cost (economic¬ 
ally, by the low expenditure it involves; politically, by its discretion, 
its low exteriorization, its relative invisibility, the little resistance it 
arouses); secondly, to bring the effects of this social power to their 
maximum intensity and to extend them as far as possible, without 
either failure or interval; thirdly, to link this ‘economic’ growth of 
power with the output of the apparatuses (educational, military, 
industrial or medical) within which it is exercised; in short, to 
increase both the docility and the utility of all the elements of the 
system. This triple objective of the disciplines corresponds to a 
well-known historical conjuncture. One aspect of this conjuncture 
was the large demographic thrust of the eighteenth century; an 
increase in the floating population (one of the primary objects of 
discipline is to fix; it is an anti-nomadic technique); a change of 
quantitative scale in the groups to be supervised or manipulated 
(from the beginning of the seventeenth century to the eve of the 
French Revolution, the school population had been increasing 
rapidly, as had no doubt the hospital population; by the end of the 
