inevitability, not from its visible intensity; it is the certainty of being 
punished and not the horrifying spectacle of public punishment that 
must discourage crime; the exemplary mechanics of punishment 
changes its mechanisms. As a result, justice no longer takes public 
responsibility for the violence that is bound up with its practice. 
If it too strikes, if it too kills, it is not as a glorification of its strength, 
but as an element of itself that it is obliged to tolerate, that it finds 
difficult to account for. The apportioning of blame is redistributed: 
in punishment-as-spectacle a confused horror spread from the 
scaffold; it enveloped both executioner and condemned; and, al¬ 
though it was always ready to invert the shame inflicted on the 
victim into pity or glory, it often turned the legal violence of the 
executioner into shame. Now the scandal and the light are to be 
distributed differently; it is the conviction itself that marks the 
offender with the unequivocally negative sign: the publicity has 
shifted to the trial, and to the sentence; the execution itself is like an 
additional shame that justice is ashamed to impose on the con¬ 
demned man; so it keeps its distance from the act, tending always to 


9 




Torture 


entrust it to others, under the seal of secrecy. It is ugly to be punish¬ 
able, but there is no glory in punishing. Hence that double system 
of protection that justice has set up between itself and the punish¬ 
ment it imposes. Those who carry out the penalty tend to 
become an autonomous sector; justice is relieved of responsibility 
for it by a bureaucratic concealment of the penalty itself. It is 
typical that in France the administration of the prisons should for so 
long have been the responsibility of the Ministry of the Interior, 
while responsibility for the bagnes, for penal servitude in the convict 
ships and penal settlements, lay with the Ministry of the Navy or 
the Ministry of the Colonies. And beyond this distribution of roles 
operates a theoretical disavowal: do not imagine that the sentences 
that we judges pass are activated by a desire to punish; they are 
intended to correct, reclaim, ‘cure’; a technique of improvement 
represses, in the penalty, the strict expiation of evil-doing, and 
relieves the magistrates of the demeaning task of punishing. In 
modern justice and on the part of those who dispense it there is a 
shame in punishing, which does not always preclude zeal. This 
sense of shame is constantly growing: the psychologists and the 
minor civil servants of moral orthopaedics proliferate on the wound 
it leaves. 

