creatures that we are. Little things; if great things presented them¬ 
selves would we perform them? Would we not think them beyond 
our strength? Little things; and if God accepts them and wishes to 
receive them as great things? Little things; has one ever felt this? 
Does one judge according to experience? Little things; one is cer¬ 
tainly guilty, therefore, if seeing them as such, one refuses them? 
Little things; yet it is they that in the end have made great saints! 
Yes, little things; but great motives, great feelings, great fervour, 
great ardour, and consequently great merits, great treasures, great 
rewards’ (La Salle, Traite ..., 238-9). The meticulousness of 
the regulations, the fussiness of the inspections, the supervision of 
the smallest fragment of life and of the body will soon provide, in the 
context of the school, the barracks, the hospital or the workshop, 
a laicized content, an economic or technical rationality for this 
mystical calculus of the infinitesimal and the infinite. And a History 
of Detail in the eighteenth century, presided over by Jean-Baptiste 
de La Salle, touching on Leibniz and Buffbn, via Frederick II, 
covering pedagogy, medicine, military tactics and economics, 
should bring us, at the end of the century, to the man who dreamt 
of being another Newton, not the Newton of the immensities of 


140 



Docile bodies 


the heavens and the planetary masses, but a Newton of ‘small 
bodies’, small movements, small actions; to the man who replied 
to Monge’s remark, ‘there was only one world to discover’: ‘What 
do I hear? But the world of details, who has never dreamt of that 
other world, what of that world? I have believed in it ever since I 
was fifteen. I was concerned with it then, and this memory lives 
within me, as an obsession never to be abandoned. . . That other 
world is the most important of all that I flatter myself I have dis¬ 
covered: when I think of it, my heart aches’ (these words are 
attributed to Bonaparte in the Introduction to Saint-Hilaire’s 
Notions synthitiques et historiques de pkilosophie naturelle). Napoleon 
did not discover this world; but we know that he set out to organize 
it; and he wished to arrange around him a mechanism of power that 
would enable him to see the smallest event that occurred in the state 
he governed; he intended, by means of the rigorous discipline that he 
imposed, ‘to embrace the whole of this vast machine without the 
slightest detail escaping his attention’ (Treilhard, 14). 

A meticulous observation of detail, and at the same time a 
political awareness of these small things, for the control and use of 
men, emerge through the classical age bearing with them a whole 
