

125 




Punishment 


of the defendant, notes on his behaviour before and after sentence: 
indispensable elements if one wished to ‘decide what steps will have 
to be taken to destroy his old habits*.^* And throughout his deten¬ 
tion he would be observed; his conduct would be noted daily and 
the inspectors - twelve local worthies appointed in 1795 - who, two 
by two, visited the prison each week, would be kept informed of 
events, follow the conduct of each prisoner and decide which of 
them deserved a shortening of his term. This ever-growing know¬ 
ledge of the individuals made it possible to divide them up in the 
prison not so much according to their crimes as according to the 
dispositions that they revealed. The prison became a sort of permanent 
observatory that made it possible to distribute the varieties of vice 
or weakness. From 1797, the prisoners were divided into four classes: 
the first for those who were explicitly condemned to solitary con¬ 
finement or who had committed serious offences in the prison; the 
second for those who were ‘well known as old offenders ... whose 
depraved morality, dangerous character, irregular dispositions, or 
disorderly conduct’ became apparent during the time they were in 
prison; the third for those ‘whose character and circumstances, 
before and after conviction, led one to believe that they were not 
habitual offenders’; the fourth and last was a special section, a 
probationary class for those whose character was still not known, 
or who, if they were better known, did not deserve to be put in the 
preceding category (Teeters, 1935, 59). A whole corpus of indivi¬ 
dualizing knowledge was being organized that took as its field of 
reference not so much the crime committed (at least in isolation), 
but the potentiality of danger that lies hidden in an individual and 
which is manifested in his observed everyday conduct. The prison 
functions in this as an apparatus of knowledge. 

Between this apparatus of punishment proposed by the Flemish, 
English and American models, between these ‘reformatories’ and 
all the punishments imagined by the reformers, one may establish 
the points of convergence and the disparities. 

Points of convergence. In the first instance, there is a difference 
in the temporal direction of punishment. The ‘reformatories’ were 
mechanisms directed towards the future; they too were intended not 
to efface a crime, but to prevent its repetition. ‘As to the end, or 


126 




The gentle way in punishment 


final cause of human punishments. This is not by way of atonement 
or expiation for the crime committed; for that must be left to the just 

determination of the supreme being_’ (Blackstone, ii). And in 

Pennsylvania, Buxton declared, the principles of Montesquieu and 
Beccaria should now have the ‘force of axioms’, that ‘the prevention 
of crimes is the sole end of punishment’ (Bradford, 3). So one 
punishes not to efface the crime, but to transform a criminal (actual 
or potential); punishment must bring with it a certain corrective 
technique. Here, too. Rush is close to the reforming jurists - were 
it not, perhaps, for the metaphor he uses when he says: we have 
invented machines that facilitate labour; how much more one should 
praise the inventor of ‘the most speedy and effectual methods of 
restoring the vicious part of mankind to virtue and happiness, and of 
extirpating a portion of vice from the world’.^® Lastly, the English 
and the American models, like the projects of the legislators and 
theoreticians, require methods to individualize the penalty: in its 
duration, its nature, its intensity, the way in which it is carried out, 
the punishment must be adjusted to the individual character and to 
the danger that he bears within him for others. The system of 
penalties must be open to individual variables. In their general out¬ 
line, the models more or less inspired by the Rasphuis of Amsterdam 
were not in contradiction with the proposals of the reformers. It 
might even be thought at first glance that they were merely a devel¬ 
opment of them - or a sketch - at the level of concrete institutions. 

Yet the disparity emerges clearly enough when one defines the 
techniques of this individualizing correction. The difference is 
to be found in the procedure of access to the individual, the way in 
which the punishing power gets control over him, the instruments 
that it uses in order to achieve this transformation; it is in the 
technology of the penalty, not in its theoretical foundation; in the 
relation that it establishes with the body and with the soul, and not 
in the way that it is inserted within the legal system. 

That was the method of the reformers. Where exactly did the 
penalty apply its pressure, gain control of the individual.^ Represen¬ 
tations: the representations of his interests, the representation of his 
advantages and disadvantages, pleasure and displeasure; and, if the 
punishment happens to seize the body, to apply techniques to it that 
