308 



Notes 


PART ONE TORTURE 

I The body of the condemned 

1 The public execution of traitors described by William Blackstone, 
Commentaries on the Laws of England, vol. 4, 1766 9, 89. Since the 
French translation was intended to bring out the humaneness of 
English legislation, in contrast with the old ordinance of 1760, the 
French translator adds the following note: ‘In this form of execution, 
which is so terrifying to see, the guilty man does not suffer much pain, 
or for long.’ 

2 In any case, I could give no notion by references or quotations what 
this book owes to Gilles Deleuze and the work he is undertaking with 
F^lix Guattari. I should also have quoted a number of pages from 
R. Castell’s Psychancdysme and say how much I am indebted to 
Pierre Nora. 

3 I shall study the birth of the prison only in the French penal system. 
Differences in historical developments and institutions would make a 
detailed comparative examination too burdensome and any attempt to 
describe the phenomenon as a whole too schematic. 

2 The spectacle of the scaffold 

1 The name given to two fortresses in old Paris, the Grand and the 
Petit Chatelet. The first, demolished in 1802, was situated on the 
right bank of the Seine. It was the seat of the criminal jurisdiction of 
the viscounty and provostry of Paris. The second, on the left bank, 
near the H6tel-Dieu, served as a prison [Tr.]. 

2 In the catalogues of judicial proofs, the confession appears in about 
the thirteenth or fourteenth century. Bernard of Pavia does not refer 
to it, but it is mentioned by Hostiemis. Crater’s definition is character¬ 
istic: 'Aut legitime convictus out sponte confessus.’ 


309 



Notes 


In medieval law, the confession was valid only when made by an 
adult and before the adversary. Cf. L^vy. 

3 The Gazette tribunaiix, 6 July 1837, reports, from a Gloucester news¬ 
paper, the ‘atrocious and disgusting’ conduct of an executioner who 
after hanging a condemned man ‘took the corpse by the shoulders, 
violently turned it round and struck it several times saying: “Are you 
dead enough now?’’ then, turning towards the crowd, laughing and 
jeering, he made several indecent remarks’. 

4 Argenson, 241. Cf. also Barbier, 455. One of the first episodes of this 
affair was very typical of popular agitation concerning penal justice in 
the eighteenth century. The lieutenant-general of police, Berryer, had 
seized ‘libertine children without confession’; the guards agreed to 
hand them back to their parents ‘only when given money’; it was said 
that the children were intended to provide for the king’s pleasure. 
The crowd, having discovered an informer, killed him ‘with an 
inhumanity carried to the farthest excess’ and ‘dragged him after his 
death, a rope around his neck, to M. Berryer’s door’. Now, this 
informer was a thief who would have been broken on the wheel with 
his accomplice Raffiat, had he not agreed to act as an informer; he was 
greatly appreciated by the police on account of his knowledge of all 
the intricacies of the plot; and he was ‘highly regarded in his new 
trade’. We have an example here that is interesting on a number of 
counts: a movement of revolt triggered off by a relatively new means 
of repression, which was not penal justice, but the police; a case of that 
technical collaboration between delinquents and police, which was to 
become normal from the eighteenth century onwards; a riot in which 
people took it upon themselves to torture a condemned man who had 
unjustly escaped the scaffold. 

5 Those whom R. Mandrou calls the two great ones: Cartouche and 
Mandrin, to whom one should add Guilleri (Mandrou, 112). In Eng¬ 
land, Jonathan Wild, Jack Sheppard and Claude Duval played a some¬ 
what similar role. 

6 This title is to be found not only in the Bibliotheque de Troyes, but 
also in the Bibliotheque de Normandie (cf. Helot). 

7 Cf., for example, Lacretelle: ‘In order to satisfy this need for strong 
emotion, in order to deepen the impression of a great example, one 
allows these terrible stories to circulate. The poets of the people take 
them up and spread their fame to every part of the land. One day a 
family hears at its door the story in song of the crime and execution 
of its sons’ (Lacretelle, 106). 


310 

