ements must be inscribed within a great temporal series, which is both 
a natural progress of the mind and a code for educative procedures. 

The ‘seriation’ of successive activities makes possible a whole 
investment of duration by power: the possibility of a detailed con¬ 
trol and a regular intervention (of differentiation, correction, 
punishment, elimination) in each moment of time; the possibility of 
characterizing, and therefore of using individuals according to the 
level in the series that they are moving through; the possibility of 
accumulating time and activity, of rediscovering them, totalized and 
usable in a final result, which is the ultimate capacity of an individual. 
Temporal dispersal is brought together to produce a profit, thus 
mastering a duration that would otherwise elude one’s grasp. Power 
is articulated directly onto time; it assures its control and guarantees 
its use. 

The disciplinary methods reveal a linear time whose moments are 
integrated, one upon another, and which is orientated towards a 
terminal, stable point; in short, an ‘evolutive’ time. But it must be 
recalled that, at the same moment, the administrative and economic 
techniques of control reveal a social time of a serial, orientated, 
cumulative type: the discovery of an evolution in terms of‘progress’, 
The disciplinary techniques reveal individual series: the discovery of 
an evolution in terms of ‘genesis’. These two great ‘discoveries’ 
of the eighteenth century - the progress of societies and the geneses 
of individuals - were perhaps correlative with the new techniques of 
power, and more specifically, with a new way of administering 
time and making it useful, by segmentation, seriation, synthesis and 
totalization. A macro- and a micro-physics of power made possible, 
not the Invention of history (it had long had no need of that), but 
the integration of a temporal, unitary, continuous, cumulative 
dimension in the exercise of controls and the practice of dominations. 
‘Evolutive’ historicity, as it was then constituted - and so profoundly 
that it is still self-evident for many today - is bound up with a mode 


160 




Docile bodies 


of functioning of power. No doubt it is as if the ‘history-remember¬ 
ing’ of the chronicles, genealogies, exploits, reigns and deeds had 
long been linked to a modality of power. With the new techniques 
of subjection, the ‘dynamics’ of continuous evolutions tends to re¬ 
place the ‘dynasties’ of solemn events. 

In any case, the small temporal continuum of individuality- 
genesis certainly seems to be, like the individuality-cell or the 
individuality-organism, an effect and an object of discipline. And, at 
the centre of this seriation of time, one finds a procedure that is, for 
it, what the drawing up of ‘tables’ was for the distribution of 
individuals and cellular segmentation, or, again, what 'manoeuvre’ 
was for the economy of activities and organic control. This proce¬ 
dure is ‘exercise’. Exercise is that technique by which one imposes 
on the body tasks that are both repetitive and different, but always 
graduated. By bending behaviour towards a terminal state, exercise 
makes possible a perpetual characterization of the individual either 
in relation to this term, in relation to other individuals, or in relation 
to a type of itinerary. It thus assures, in the form of continuity and 
constraint, a growth, an observation, a qualification. Before adopt¬ 
ing this strictly disciplinary form, exercise had a long history: it is 
to be found in military, religious and university practices either as 
initiation ritual, preparatory ceremony, theatrical rehearsal or 
examination. Its linear, continuously progressive organization, its 
genetic development in time were, at least in the army and the 
school, introduced at a later date - and were no doubt of religious 
origin. In any case, the idea of an educational ‘programme’ that 
would follow the child to the end of his schooling and which would 
involve from year to year, month to month, exercises of increasing 
complexity, first appeared, it seems, in a religious group, the 
Brothers of the Common Life (cf. Meir, i6o ff). Strongly inspired 
by Ruysbroek and Rhenish mysticism, they transposed certain of 
the spiritual techniques to education - and to the education not only 
of clerks, but also of magistrates and merchants: the theme of a per¬ 
fection towards which the exemplary master guides the pupil became 
with them that of an authoritarian perfection of the pupils by the 
teacher; the ever-increasing rigorous exercises that the ascetic life 
proposed became tasks of increasing complexity that marked the 
gradual acquisition of knowledge and good behaviour; the striving 



Discipline 


of the whole community towards salvation became the collective, 
permanent competition of individuals being classified in relation to 
one another. Perhaps it was these procedures of community life and 
salvation that were the first nucleus of methods intended to produce 
individually characterized, but collectively useful aptitudes.® In its 
mystical or ascetic form, exercise was a way of ordering earthly time 
for the conquest of salvation. It was gradually, in the history of the 
West, to change direction while preserving certain of its character¬ 
istics; it served to economize the time of life, to accumulate it in a 
useful form and to exercise power over men through the mediation 
of time arranged in this way. Exercise, having become an element 
