The amende honorable was first abolished in France in 1791, then 
again in 1830 after a brief revival; the pillory was abolished in 
France in 1789 and in England in 1837. The use of prisoners in 
public works, cleaning city streets or repairing the highways, was 
practised in Austria, Switzerland and certain of the United States, 
such as Pennsylvania. These convicts, distinguished by their 
‘infamous dress’ and shaven heads, ‘were brought before the public. 
The sport of the idle and the vicious, they often become incensed, 
and naturally took violent revenge upon the aggressors. To prevent 
them from returning injuries which might be inflicted on them, 
they were encumbered with iron collars and chains to which bomb¬ 
shells were attached, to be dragged along while they performed their 
degrading service, under the eyes of keepers armed with swords, 
blunderbusses and other weapons of destruction’ (Roberts Vaux, 
Notices, 21, quoted in Teeters, 1937,24). This practice was abolished 
practically everywhere at the end of the eighteenth or the beginning 
of the nineteenth century. The public exhibition of prisoners was 
maintained in France in 1831, despite violent criticism - ‘a disgust¬ 
ing scene’, said Real (cf. Bibliography); it was finally abolished in 
April 1848. While the chain-gang, which had dragged convicts 


8 



The body of the condemned 


across the whole of France, as far as Brest and Toulon, was replaced 
in 1837 by inconspicuous black-painted cell-carts. Punishment had 
gradually ceased to be a spectacle. And whatever theatrical elements 
it still retained were now downgraded, as if the functions of the 
penal ceremony were gradually ceasing to be understood, as if this 
rite that ‘concluded the crime’ was suspected of being in some 
undesirable way linked with it. It was as if the punishment was 
thought to equal, if not to exceed, in savagery the crime itself, to 
accustom the spectators to a ferocity from which one wished to 
divert them, to show them the frequency of crime, to make the 
executioner resemble a criminal, judges murderers, to reverse roles 
at the last moment, to make the tortured criminal an object of pity 
or admiration. As early as 1764, Beccaria remarked: ‘The murder 
that is depicted as a horrible crime is repeated in cold blood, 
remorselessly’ (Beccaria, loi). The public execution is now seen as 
a hearth in which violence bursts again into flame. 

Punishment, then, will tend to become the most hidden part of 
the penal process. This has several consequences: it leaves the 
domain of more or less everyday perception and enters that of 
abstract consciousness; its effectiveness is seen as resulting from its 
inevitability, not from its visible intensity; it is the certainty of being 
punished and not the horrifying spectacle of public punishment that 
must discourage crime; the exemplary mechanics of punishment 
changes its mechanisms. As a result, justice no longer takes public 
responsibility for the violence that is bound up with its practice. 
If it too strikes, if it too kills, it is not as a glorification of its strength, 
but as an element of itself that it is obliged to tolerate, that it finds 
difficult to account for. The apportioning of blame is redistributed: 
in punishment-as-spectacle a confused horror spread from the 
scaffold; it enveloped both executioner and condemned; and, al¬ 
though it was always ready to invert the shame inflicted on the 
victim into pity or glory, it often turned the legal violence of the 
executioner into shame. Now the scandal and the light are to be 
distributed differently; it is the conviction itself that marks the 
offender with the unequivocally negative sign: the publicity has 
shifted to the trial, and to the sentence; the execution itself is like an 
additional shame that justice is ashamed to impose on the con¬ 
demned man; so it keeps its distance from the act, tending always to 


9 




Torture 


entrust it to others, under the seal of secrecy. It is ugly to be punish¬ 
able, but there is no glory in punishing. Hence that double system 
of protection that justice has set up between itself and the punish¬ 
ment it imposes. Those who carry out the penalty tend to 
become an autonomous sector; justice is relieved of responsibility 
for it by a bureaucratic concealment of the penalty itself. It is 
typical that in France the administration of the prisons should for so 
long have been the responsibility of the Ministry of the Interior, 
while responsibility for the bagnes, for penal servitude in the convict 
ships and penal settlements, lay with the Ministry of the Navy or 
the Ministry of the Colonies. And beyond this distribution of roles 
operates a theoretical disavowal: do not imagine that the sentences 
that we judges pass are activated by a desire to punish; they are 
intended to correct, reclaim, ‘cure’; a technique of improvement 
represses, in the penalty, the strict expiation of evil-doing, and 
relieves the magistrates of the demeaning task of punishing. In 
modern justice and on the part of those who dispense it there is a 
shame in punishing, which does not always preclude zeal. This 
sense of shame is constantly growing: the psychologists and the 
minor civil servants of moral orthopaedics proliferate on the wound 
it leaves. 

