gallows and scaffolds were erected in public squares or by the road¬ 
side; sometimes the corpses of the executed persons were displayed 
for several days near the scenes of their crimes. Not only must 
people know, they must see with their own eyes. Because they must 
be made to be afraid; but also because they must be the witnesses, 
the guarantors, of the punishment, and because they must to a 
certain extent take part in it. The right to be witnesses was one that 
they possessed and claimed; a hidden execution was a privileged 
execution, and in such cases it was often suspected that it had not 
taken place with all its customary severity. There were protests 
when at the last moment the victim was taken away out of sight. 
The senior postal official who had been put on public exhibition 
for killing his wife was later taken away from the crowd. ‘He was 
put into a hired coach; it was thought that if he had not been well 
escorted, it would have been difficult to protect him from being 
ill-treated by the populace, who yelled and jeered at him’ (Hardy, I, 
328). When the woman Lescombat was hanged, care was taken to 
hide her face; she had ‘a kerchief over her neck and head, which 
made the public murmur and say that it was not Lescombat’ 
(Anchel, 70-71). The people claimed the right to observe the execu¬ 
tion and to see who was being executed. The first time the guillotine 
was used the Chronique de Paris reported that people complained 
that they could not see anything and chanted, ‘Give us back our 
gallows’ (Lawrence, yiff). The people also had a right to take part. 
The condemned man, carried in procession, exhibited, humiliated, 
with the horror of his crime recalled in innumerable ways, was 


58 




The spectacle of the scaffold 


offered to the insults, sometimes to the attacks of the spectators. 
The vengeance of the people was called upon to become an un¬ 
obtrusive part of the vengeance of the sovereign. Not that it was 
in any way fundamental, or that the king had to express in his own 
way the people’s revenge; it was rather that the people had to bring 
its assistance to the king when the king undertook ‘to be avenged 
on his enemies’, especially when those enemies were to be found 
among the people. It was rather like a ‘scaffold service’ that the 
people owed the king’s vengeance. This ‘service’ had been specified 
in the old ordinances; the edict of 1347 concerning blasphemers 
stipulated that they would be exhibited at the pillory ‘from the hour 
of prime, to that of their deaths. And mud and other refuse, though 
no stone or anything injurious, could be thrown at their faces. . . 
The second time, in case of relapse, it is our will that he be put in the 
pillory on a solemn market day, and that his upper lip be split so 
that the teeth appear.’ No doubt, at the classical period, this form 
of participation in the torture was no more than tolerated and 
attempts were made to limit it: because of the barbarities that it gave 
rise to and the usurpation it involved of the power to punish. But it 
belonged too closely to the general economy of the public execution 
for it to be eliminated altogether. Even in the eighteenth century, 
there were scenes like the one that accompanied the execution of 
Montigny in 1737; as the executioner was carrying out the execu¬ 
tion, the local fish-wives walked in procession, holding aloft an 
effigy of the condemned man, and then cut off its head (Anchel, 63). 
And very often, as they moved slowly in procession through it, 
criminals had to be ‘protected’ from the crowd - both as an example 
and as a target, a possible threat and a ‘prey’, promised but also 
forbidden. In calling on the crowd to manifest its power, the 
sovereign tolerated for a moment acts of violence, which he accepted 
as a sign of allegiance, but which were strictly limited by the sover¬ 
eign’s own privileges. 

Now it was on this point that the people, drawn to the spectacle 
intended to terrorize it, could express its rejection of the punitive 
power and sometimes revolt. Preventing an execution that was 
regarded as unjust, snatching a condemned man from the hands of 
the executioner, obtaining his pardon by force, possibly pursuing 
and assaulting the executioners, in any case abusing the judges and 


59 




Torture 


causing an uproar against the sentence - all this formed part of the 
popular practices that invested, traversed and often overturned the 
ritual of the public execution. TTiis often happened, of course, in the 
case of those condemned for rioting: there were the disturbances 
that followed a famous case of child abduction, when the crowd 
wanted to prevent the execution of three supposed rioters, who were 
to be hanged at the cemetery of Saint-Jean, ‘because there were 
fewer entrances and processions to guard’;* the terrified executioner 
cut down one of the condemned men; the archers let fly their arrows. 
It occurred again after the corn riots of 1775; and again in 1786, 
when the day-labourers marched on Versailles and set about freeing 
their arrested comrades. But apart from these cases, when the pro¬ 
cess of agitation had been triggered off previously and for reasons 
that did not concern some measure of penal justice, one finds many 
examples when the agitation was provoked directly by a verdict 
