principle of its force in the movement by which it deployed that 
force. Those on whom it was exercised could remain in the shade; 
they received light only from that portion of power that was 
conceded to them, or from the reflection of it that for a moment they 
carried. Disciplinary power, on the other hand, is exercised through 
its invisibility; at the same time it imposes on those whom it subjects 
a principle of compulsory visibility. In discipline, it is the subjects 
who have to be seen. Their visibility assures the hold of the power 
that is exercised over them. It is the fact of being constantly seen, 
of being able always to be seen, that maintains the disciplined 
individual in his subjection. And the examination is the technique 
by which power, instead of emitting the signs of its potency, instead 
of imposing its mark on its subjects, holds them in a mechanism of 
objectification. In this space of domination, disciplinary power 
manifests its potency, essentially, by arranging objects. The 
examination is, as it were, the ceremony of this objectification. 

Hitherto the role of the political ceremony had been to give rise 
to the excessive, yet regulated manifestation of power; it was a 
spectacular expression of potency, an ‘expenditure’, exaggerated and 




Discipline 


coded, in which power renewed its vigour. It was always more or 
less related to the triumph. The solemn appearance of the sovereign 
brought with it something of the consecration, the coronation, the 
return from victory; even the funeral ceremony took place with all 
the spectacle of power deployed. Discipline, however, had its own 
type of ceremony. It was not the triumph, but the review, the 
‘parade’, an ostentatious form of the examination. In it the ‘subjects’ 
were presented as ‘objects’ to the observation of a power that was 
manifested only by its gaze. They did not receive directly the image 
of the sovereign power; they only felt its effects - in replica, as it 
were - on their bodies, which had become precisely legible and 
docile. On 15 March 1666, Louis XIV took his first military review: 
18,000 men, ‘one of the most sjjectacular actions of the reign’, which 
was supposed to have ‘kept all Europe in disquiet’. Several years 
later, a medal was struck to commemorate the event (cf. Jucquiot, 
50-54). It bears the exergue, ‘Disciplina militaris restitua and the 
legend ‘Prolusio ad victorias'. On the right, the king, right foot 
forward, commands the exercise itself with a stick. On the left, 
several ranks of soldiers are shown full face and aligned in depth; 
they have raised their right arms to shoulder height and are holding 
their rifles exactly vertical, their right legs are slightly forward and 
their left feet turned outwards. On the ground, lines intersect at 
right angles, to form, beneath the soldiers’ feet, broad rectangles 
that serve as references for different phases and positions of the 
exercise. In the background is a piece of classical architecture. The 
columns of the palace extend those formed by the ranks of men and 
the erect rifles, just as the paving no doubt extends the lines of the 
exercise. But above the balustrade that crowns the building are 
statues representing dancing figures: sinuous lines, rounded ges¬ 
tures, draperies. The marble is covered with movements whose 
principle of unity is harmonic. The men, on the other hand, are 
frozen into a uniformly repeated attitude of ranks and lines: a 
tactical unity. The order of the architecture, which frees at its sum¬ 
mit the figures of the dance, imposes its rules and its geometry on the 
disciplined men on the ground. The columns of power. ‘Very good’. 
Grand Duke Mikhail once remarked of a regiment, after having 
kept it for one hour presenting arms, ‘only they breathe' (Kropotkin, 
8; I owe this reference to G. Canguilhem). 




The means of correct training 


Let us take this medal as evidence of the moment when, para¬ 
doxically but significantly, the most brilliant figure of sovereign 
power is joined to the emergence of the rituals proper to disciplinary 
power. The scarcely sustainable visibility of the monarch is turned 
into the unavoidable visibility of the subjects. And it is this inversion 
of visibility in the functioning of the disciplines that was to assure the 
exercise of power even in its lowest manifestations. We are entering 
the age of the infinite examination and of compulsory objectification. 

2. The examination also introduces individuality into the field of 
documentation. The examination leaves behind it a whole meticulous 
archive constituted in terms of bodies and days. The examination 
that places individuals in a field of surveillance also situates them in 
a network of writing; it engages them in a whole mass of documents 
that capture and fix them. The procedures of examination were 
accompanied at the same time by a system of intense registration 
and of documentary accumulation. A ‘power of writing’ was con¬ 
stituted as an essential part in the mechanisms of discipline. On many 
points, it was modelled on the traditional methods of administrative 
documentation, though with particular techniques and important 
innovations. Some concerned methods of identification, signalling 
or description. This was the problem in the army, where it was 
necessary to track down deserters, avoid repeating enrolments, 
correct fictitious ‘information’ presented by officers, know the ser¬ 
vices and value of each individual, establish with certainty 
the balance-sheet of those who had disappeared or died. It was the 
problem of the hospitals, where it was necessary to recognize 
the patients, expel shammers, follow the evolution of diseases, study 
