schema of individual isolation and hierarchy; the economic model 
of force applied to compulsory work; the technico-medical model 
of cure and normalization. The cell, the workshop, the hospital. 
The margin by which the prison exceeds detention is filled in fact 
by techniques of a disciplinary type. And this disciplinary addition 
to the juridical is what, in short, is called the ‘penitentiary’. 

This addition was not accepted easily. To begin with, there was 
the question of principle: the penalty must be nothing more than 
the deprivation of liberty; like our present rulers, but with all the 
freshness of his language, Decazes says: ‘The law must follow the 
convicted man into the prison where it has sent him’ (Decazes). But 
very soon - and this is a characteristic fact - these debates were to 
become a battle for appropriating control of this additional peni¬ 
tentiary element; the judges were to demand a right of inspection 
over the carceral mechanisms: ‘The moral enlightenment of the 
inmates requires innumerable cooperators; it is only by visits of 
inspection, commissions of surveillance and charity associations that 
this may be accomplished. Auxiliaries, then, are needed and it is the 
judges who must provide them’ (Ferrus, viii; an ordinance of 1847 
had set up commissions of surveillance). From this period, the 
penitentiary order had become sufficiently well established for there 
to be no question of dismantling it; the question was how to get 
control of it. This gave rise to the figure of the judge obsessed by a 
desire for prison. A century later, this was to give birth to a bastard, 
yet deformed child: the magistrate entrusted with the determination 
of penalties. 

But, if the penitentiary, in so far as it went well beyond mere 
detention, was able not only to establish itself, but to entrap the 


248 




Complete and austere institutions 


whole of penal justice and to imprison the judges themselves, it was 
because it was able to introduce criminal justice into relations of 
knowledge that have since become its infinite labyrinth. 

The prison, the place where the penalty is carried out, is also the 
place of observation of punished individuals. This takes two forms: 
surveillance, of course, but also knowledge of each inmate, of his 
behaviour, his deeper states of mind, his gradual improvement; the 
prisons must be conceived as places for the formation of clinical 
knowledge about the convicts; ‘the penitentiary system cannot be 
an a priori conception; it is an induction of the social state. There are 
moral diseases, as well as breakdowns in health, where the treatment 
depends on the site and direction of the illness’ (Faucher, 6). This 
involves two essential mechanisms. It must be possible to hold the 
prisoner under permanent observation; every report that can be 
made about him must be recorded and computed. The theme of the 
Panopticon - at once surveillance and observation, security and 
knowledge, individualization and totalization, isolation and trans¬ 
parency - found in the prison its privileged locus of realization. 
Although the panoptic procedures, as concrete forms of the exercise 
of power, have become extremely widespread, at least in their less 
concentrated forms, it was really only in the penitentiary institu¬ 
tions that Bentham’s utopia could be fully expressed in a material 
form. In the 1830s, the Panopticon became the architectural pro¬ 
gramme of most prison projects. It was the most direct way of 
expressing ‘the intelligence of discipline in stone’ (Lucas, I, 69); of 
making architecture transparent to the administration of power;^® 
of making it possible to substitute for force or other violent con¬ 
straints the gentle efficiency of total surveillance; of ordering space 
according to the recent humanization of the codes and the new 
penitentiary theory: ‘The authorities, on the one hand, and the 
architect, on the other, must know, therefore, whether the prisons 
are to be based on the principle of milder penalties or on a system 
of reforming convicts, in accordance with legislation which, by 
getting to the root cause of the people’s vices, becomes a principle 
that will regenerate the virtues that they must practice’ (Baltard, 4-5). 

In short, its task was to constitute a prison-machine*® with a cell 
of visibility in which the inmate will find himself caught as ‘in the 
glass house of the Greek philosopher’ (Harou-Romain, 8) and a 


249 




Prison 


central point from which a permanent gaze may control prisoners 
and staff. Around these two requirements, several variations were 
possible: the Benthamite Panopticon in its strict form, the semi¬ 
circle, the cross-plan, the star shape. In the midst of all these dis¬ 
cussions, the Minister of the Interior in 1841 sums up the funda¬ 
mental principles: ‘The central inspection hall is the pivot of the 
system. Without a central point of inspection, surveillance ceases 
to be guaranteed, continuous and general; for it is impossible to 
have complete trust in the activity, zeal and intelligence of the 
warder who immediately supervises the cells... The architect must 
