
Panopticism 


a concentrated or formalized form, the schema of power-knowledge 
proper to each discipline (on this subject, cf. Tort). The great 
investigation that gave rise to the sciences of nature has become 
detached from its politico-juridical model; the examination, on the 
other hand, is still caught up in disciplinary technology. 

In the Middle Ages, the procedure of investigation gradually 
superseded the old accusatory justice, by a process initiated from 
above; the disciplinary technique, on the other hand, insidiously 
and as if from below, has invaded a penal justice that is still, in 
principle, inquisitorial. All the great movements of extension that 
characterize modern penality - the problematization of the criminal 
behind his crime, the concern with a punishment that is a correction, 
a therapy, a normalization, the division of the act of judgement 
between various authorities that are supposed to measure, assess, 
diagnose, cure, transform individuals - all this betrays the penetra¬ 
tion of the disciplinary examination into the judicial inquisition. 

What is now imposed on penal justice as its point of application, 
its ‘useful’ object, will no longer be the body of the guilty man set 
up against the body of the king; nor will it be the juridical subject 
of an ideal contract; it will be the disciplinary individual. The 
extreme point of penal justice under the Ancien Regime was the 
infinite segmentation of the body of the regicide: a manifestation 
of the strongest power over the body of the greatest criminal, 
whose total destruction made the crime explode into its truth. The 
ideal point of penality today would be an indefinite discipline; an 
interrogation without end, an investigation that would be extended 
without limit to a meticulous and ever more analytical observation, 
a judgement that would at the same time be the constitution of a file 
that was never closed, the calculated leniency of a penalty that would 
be interlaced with the ruthless curiosity of an examination, a proce¬ 
dure that would be at the same time the permanent measure of a 
gap in relation to an inaccessible norm and the asymptotic move¬ 
ment that strives to meet in infinity. The public execution was the 
logical culmination of a procedure governed by the Inquisition. The 
practice of placing individuals under ‘observation’ is a natural exten¬ 
sion of a justice imbued with disciplinary methods and examination 
procedures. Is it surprising that the cellular prison, with its regular 
chronologies, forced labour, its authorities of surveillance and 


227 



Discipline 


registration, its experts in normality, who continue and multiply the 
fimctions of the judge, should have become the modern instrument 
of penality? Is it surprising that prisons resemble factories, schools, 
barracks, hospitals, which all resemble prisons? 


228 




PART FOUR 

Prison 






I. Complete and austere institutions 


It would not be true to say that the prison was born with the new 
codes. The prison form antedates its systematic use in the penal 
system. It had already been constituted outside the legal apparatus 
when, throughout the social body, procedures were being elaborated 
for distributing individuals, fixing them in space, classifying them, 
extracting from them the maximum in time and forces, training their 
bodies, coding their continuous behaviour, maintaining them in 
perfect visibility, forming around them an apparatus of observation, 
registration and recording, constituting on them a body of know¬ 
ledge that is accumulated and centralized. The general form of an 
apparatus intended to render individuals docile and useful, by means 
of precise work upon their bodies, indicated the prison institution, 
before the law ever defined it as the penalty par excellence. At the 
turn of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, there was, it is true, 
a penality of detention; and it was a new thing. But it was really the 
opening up of penality to mechanisms of coercion already elaborated 
elsewhere. The ‘models’ of penal detention - Ghent, Gloucester, 
Walnut Street - marked the first visible points of this transition, 
rather than innovations or points of departure. The prison, an 
essential element in the punitive panopoly, certainly marks an import¬ 
ant moment in the history of penal justice: its access to ‘humanity’. 
But it is also an important moment in the history of those disci¬ 
plinary mechanisms that the new class power was developing: that 
in which they colonized the legal institution. At the turn of the 
