slow deaths and the altercations that occurred between victim and 
executioner. It was improved and finally adopted in 1783, the same 
year in which the traditional procession from Newgate to Tyburn 
was abolished, and in which the opportunity offered by the rebuild¬ 
ing of the prison, after the Gordon Riots, was used to set up the 
scaffolds in Newgate itself (see Hibbert, 85-6). The celebrated 
article 3 of the French Code of 1791 - ‘Every man condemned to 
death will have his head cut off’ — bears this triple signification: an 
equal death for all (‘Crimes of the same kind will be punished by the 
same kind of punishment, whatever the rank and state of the guilty 
man may be,’ in the words of the motion proposed by Guillotin and 
passed on i December 1789); one death per condemned man, 
obtained by a single blow, without recourse to those ‘long and 
consequently cruel’ methods of execution, such as the gallows. 


12 




The body of the condemned 


denounced by Le Peletier; lastly, punishment for the condemned 
man alone, since decapitation, the capital punishment of the nobility, 
was the least shaming for the criminal’s family (Le Peletier, 720). 
The guillotine, first used in March 1792, was the perfect vehicle for 
these principles. Death was reduced to a visible, but instantaneous 
event. Contact between the law, or those who carry it out, and the 
body of the criminal, is reduced to a split second. There is no 
physical confrontation; the executioner need be no more than a 
meticulous watchmaker. ‘Experience and reason demonstrate that 
the method used in the past to cut off the head of a criminal exposed 
him to a torture more frightful than the loss of life alone, which is 
the express intention of the law; the execution should therefore be 
carried out in a single moment and with a single blow; examples 
show how difficult it is to achieve this. For the method to work 
perfectly, it must necessarily depend on invariable mechanical 
means whose force and effect may also be determined. . . It is an 
easy enough matter to have such an unfailing machine built; decapi¬ 
tation will be performed in a moment according to the intention of 
the new law. If this apparatus seems necessary, it will cause no 
sensation and will be scarcely noticed’ (Saint-Edme, 161). The 
guillotine takes life almost without touching the body, just as prison 
deprives of liberty or a fine reduces wealth. It is intended to apply 
the law not so much to a real body capable of feeling pain as to a 
juridical subject, the possessor, among other rights, of the right to 
exist. It had to have the abstraction of the law itself. 

No doubt something of the old public execution was, for a time, 
superimposed in France on the sobriety of the new method. Parri¬ 
cides - and the regicides who were regarded as such - were led to 
the scaffold wearing a black veil; there, until 1832, one of their 
hands was cut off. Thereafter, nothing remained but the ornamental 
crepe. Thus it was in the case of Fieschi, the would-be assassin of 
Louis-Philippe, in November 1836: ‘He will be taken to the place 
of execution wearing a shirt, barefoot, his head covered with a black 
veil; he will be exhibited upon a scaffold while an usher reads the 
sentence to the people, and he will be immediately executed.’ We 
should remember Damiens - and note that the last addition to penal 
death was a mourning veil. The condemned man was no longer to 
be seen. Only the reading of the sentence on the scaffold announced 


13 




Torture 


the crime - and that crime must be faceless. (The more monstrous a 
criminal was, the more he must be deprived of light: he must not see, 
or be seen. This was a common enough notion at the time. For the 
parricide one should ‘construct an iron cage or dig an impenetrable 
dungeon that would serve him as an eternal retreat’ - De Molene, 
275-7-) The last vestige of the great public execution was its annul¬ 
ment: a drapery to hide a body. Benoit, triply infamous (his 
mother’s murderer, a homosexual, an assassin), was the first of the 
parricides not to have a hand cut off: ‘As the sentence was being 
read, he stood on the scaffold supported by the executioners. It was 
a horrible sight; wrapped in a large white shroud, his face covered 
with black crepe, the parricide escaped the gaze of the silent crowd, 
and beneath these mysterious and gloomy clothes, life was mani¬ 
fested only by frightful cries, which soon expired under the knife’ 
{Gazette des trihunaux, 30 August 1832). 

At the beginning of the nineteenth century, then, the great 
spectacle of physical punishment disappeared; the tortured body 
was avoided; the theatrical representation of pain was excluded from 
punishment. The age of sobriety in punishment had begun. By 
1830-48, public executions, preceded by torture, had almost entirely 
disappeared. Of course, this generalization requires some qualifica¬ 
tion. To begin with, the changes did not come about at once or as 
part of a single process. There were delays. Paradoxically, England 
was one of the countries most loath to see the disappearance of the 
public execution: perhaps because of the role of model that the 
institution of the jury, public hearings and respect of habeas corpus 
