
Similarly, the school became a sort of apparatus of uninterrupted 
examination that duplicated along its entire length the operation of 
teaching. It became less and less a question of jousts in which pupils 
pitched their forces against one another and increasingly a perpetual 
comparison of each and all that made it possible both to measure and 
to judge. The Brothers of the Christian Schools wanted their pupils 
to be examined every day of the week: on the first for spelling, on 
the second for arithmetic, on the third for catechism in the morning 
and for handwriting in the afternoon, etc. Moreover, there was to be 
an examination each month in order to pick out those who deserved 
to be submitted for examination by the inspector (La Salle, Con- 
duite ..., i6o). From 1775, there existed at the Fcole des Fonts et 
Chaussees sixteen examinations a year: three in mathematics, three 
in architecture, three in drawing, two in writing, one in stone¬ 
cutting, one in style, one in surveying, one in levelling, one in 
quantity surveying. The examination did not simply mark the end of 
an apprenticeship; it was one of its permanent factors; it was woven 
into it through a constantly repeated ritual of power. The examina¬ 
tion enabled the teacher, while transmitting his knowledge, to 
transform his pupils into a whole field of knowledge. Whereas the 
examination with which an apprenticeship ended in the guild 




The means of correct training 


tradition validated an acquired aptitude - the ‘master-work’ 
authenticated a transmission of knowledge that had already been 
accomplished - the examination in the school was a constant 
exchanger of knowledge; it guaranteed the movement of knowledge 
from the teacher to the pupil, but it extracted from the pupil a 
knowledge destined and reserved for the teacher. The school became 
the place of elaboration for pedagogy. And just as the procedure of 
the hospital examination made possible the epistemological ‘thaw’ of 
medicine, the age of the ‘examining’ school marked the beginnings 
of a pedagogy that functions as a science. The age of inspections and 
endlessly repeated movements in the army also marked the develop¬ 
ment of an immense tactical knowledge that had its effect in the 
period of the Napoleonic wars. 

The examination introduced a whole mechanism that linked to a 
certain type of the formation of knowledge a certain form of the 
exercise of power. 

I. The examination transformed the economy of visibility into the 
exercise of power. Traditionally, power was what was seen, what was 
shown and what was manifested and, paradoxically, found the 
