ness of these investigations and penalties to be reconciled with the 

, certainties of a prompt and exemplary punishment, so that civil society 

311 


Notes 


finds the greatest possible security for liberty and humanity?’ (Eco¬ 
nomic Society of Berne, 1777). Marat responded with his Plan de 
Legislation criminelle. ‘What are the means of alleviating the rigour of 
the penal laws in France without damage to public safety?’ (Acaddmie 
de Chalons-sur-Marne, 1780; the winners were Brissot and Bemardi); 
‘does the extreme severity of the laws tend to diminish the number and 
enormity of crimes in a depraved nation?’ (Acad^mie de Marseille, 
1786; the winner was Eymar). 

7 G. Target, Observations sur le projet du Code pinal, in Locr^, 7-8. It 
is to be found in an inverted form in Kant. 

8 ‘Society does not see in the punishments it inflicts the barbarous 
pleasure of making a human being suffer; it sees it as a necessary 
precaution to prevent similar crimes, to protect society from the evils 
with which murder threatens it’ (Bamave, 9). 

9 Beccaria, 26. Cf. also Brissot: ‘If pardon is equitable, the law is bad; 
when legislation is good, pardons are only crimes against the law’ 
(Brissot, 200). 

10 Mably, 327. Cf. also Vattel: ‘It is not so much the atrocity of the 
penalties as the exactitude with which they are carried out that keeps 
everybody within his duty’ (Mably, 163). 

11 Contrary to what Carnot or Helie and Chauveau say, recidivism was 
very clearly punished in a number of laws under the Ancien Regime. 
The ordinance of 1549 declares that the malefactor who repeats his 
crime is an ‘execrable, infamous being, eminently pernicious to the 
commonwealth’; recidivism for blasphemy, theft, vagabondage, etc., 
were subject to special penalties. 

12 Le Peletier, 321-2. The following year, Bellart made what may be 
regarded as the first defence of a crime passionel. This was the Gras 
affair. Cf. Armales du barreau rrtodeme, 1823, III, 34. 

2 The gentle way in punishment 

1 Le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau. The authors who abandoned the death 
penalty envisaged some definite penalties; Brissot, 29-30. Dufriche de 
