individuals; it gives ‘power of mind over mind’. The panoptic 
schema makes any apparatus of power more intense: it assures its 
economy (in material, in personnel, in time); it assures its efficacity 
by its preventative character, its continuous functioning and its 
automatic mechanisms. It is a way of obtaining from power ‘in 
hitherto unexampled quantity’, ‘a great and new instrument of 
government ...; its great excellence consists in the great strength 
it is capable of giving to any institution it may be thought proper to 
apply it to’ (Bentham, 66). 

It’s a case of ‘it’s easy once you’ve thought of it’ in the political 
sphere. It can in fact be integrated into any function (education, 
medical treatment, production, punishment); it can increase the 
effect of this function, by being linked closely with it; it can consti¬ 
tute a mixed mechanism in which relations of power (and of know¬ 
ledge) may be precisely adjusted, in the smallest detail, to the pro¬ 
cesses that are to be supervised; it can establish a direct proportion 
between ‘surplus power’ and ‘surplus production’. In short, it 
arranges things in such a way that the exercise of power is not 
added on from the outside, like a rigid, heavy constraint, to the 
functions it invests, but is so subtly present in them as to increase 
their efficiency by itself increasing its own points of contact. The 
panoptic mechanism is not simply a hinge, a point of exchange 
between a mechanism of power and a function; it is a way of making 


206 




Panopticism 


power relations function in a function, and of making a function 
function through these power relations. Bentham’s Preface to 
Panopticon opens with a list of the benefits to be obtained from his 
‘inspection-house’: 'Morals reformed — health preserved — industry 
invigorated- instruction diffused - public burthens lightened - Economy 
seated, as it were, upon a rock - the gordian knot of the Poor-Laws 
not cut, but untied - all by a simple idea in architecture!’ (Bentham, 
39 )- 

Furthermore, the arrangement of this machine is such that its 
enclosed nature does not preclude a permanent presence from the 
outside: we have seen that anyone may come and exercise in the cen¬ 
tral tower the functions of surveillance, and that, this being the case, 
he can gain a clear idea of the way in which the surveillance is practised. 
In fact, any panoptic institution, even if it is as rigorously closed 
as a penitentiary, may without difficulty be subjected to such irregu¬ 
lar and constant inspections: and not only by the appointed inspec¬ 
tors, but also by the public; any member of society will have the 
right to come and see with his own eyes how the schools, hospitals, 
factories, prisons function. There is no risk, therefore, that the 
increase of power created by the.panoptic machine may degenerate 
into tyranny; the disciplinary mechanism will be democratically 
controlled, since it will be constantly accessible ‘to the great tribun^ 
committee of the world’.* This Panopticon, subtly arranged so that 
an observer may observe, at a glance, so many different individuals, 
also enables everyone to come and observe any of the observers. 
The seeing machine was once a sort of dark room into which 
individuals spied; it has become a transparent building in which the 
exercise of power may be supervised by society as a whole. 

The panoptic schema, without disappearing as such or losing any 
of its properties, was destined to spread throughout the social body; 
its vocation was to become a generalized function. The plague- 
stricken town provided an exceptional disciplinary model: perfect, 
but absolutely violent; to the disease that brought death, power 
opposed its perpetual threat of death; life inside it was reduced to 
its simplest expression; it was, against the power of death, the meti¬ 
culous exercise of the right of the sword. The Panopticon, on the 
other hand, has a role of amplification; although it arranges power, 
although it is intended to make it more economic and more effective. 


207 



Discipline 


it does so not for power itself, nor for the immediate salvation of a 
threatened society: its aim is to strengthen the social forces - to 
increase production, to develop the economy, spread education, 
raise the level of public morality; to increase and multiply. 

How is power to be strengthened in such a way that, far from 
impeding progress, far from weighing upon it with its rules and 
regulations, it actually facilitates such progress.^ What intensificator 
of power will be able at the same time to be a multiplicator of pro¬ 
duction.^ How will power, by increasing its forces, be able to increase 
those of society instead of confiscating them or impeding them.^ The 
Panopticon’s solution to this problem is that the productive increase 
of power can be assured only if, on the one hand, it can be exercised 
continuously in the very foundations of society, in the subtlest 
possible way, and if, on the other hand, it functions outside these 
sudden, violent, discontinuous forms that are bound up with the 
exercise of sovereignty. The body of the king, with its strange 
