assignment to each individual of his ‘true’ name, his ‘true’ place, his 
‘true’ body, his ‘true’ disease. The plague as a form, at once real 
and imaginary, of disorder had as its medical and political correlative 
discipline. Behind the disciplinary mechanisms can be read the 
haunting memory of ‘contagions’, of the plague, of rebellions, 
crimes, vagabondage, desertions, people who appear and disappear, 
live and die in disorder. 

If it is true that the leper gave rise to rituals of exclusion, which to 
a certain extent provided the model for and general form of the 
great Confinement, then the plague gave rise to disciplinary pro¬ 
jects. Rather than the massive, binary division between one set of 
people and another, it called for multiple separations, individualizing 
distributions, an organization in depth of surveillance and control, 
an intensification and a ramification of power. The leper was caught 
up in a practice of rejection, of exile-enclosure; he was left to his 
doom in a mass among which it was useless to differentiate; those 
sick of the plague were caught up in a meticulous tactical partition¬ 
ing in which individual differentiations were the constricting effects 
of a power that multiplied, articulated and subdivided itself; the great 
confinement on the one hand; the correct training on the other. 
The leper and his separation; the plague and its segmentations. The 
first is marked; the second analysed and distributed. The exile of 
the leper and the arrest of the plague do not bring with them the 
same political dream. The first is that of a pure community, the 
second that of a disciplined society. Two ways of exercising power 
over men, of controlling their relations, of separating out their 
dangerous mixtures. The plague-stricken town, traversed through¬ 
out with hierarchy, surveillance, observation, writing; the town 
immobilized by the functioning of an extensive power that bears in 
a distinct way over all individual bodies - this is the utopia of the 
perfectly governed city. The plague (envisaged as a possibility at 
least) is the trial in the course of which one may define ideally the 
exercise of disciplinary power. In order to make rights and laws 


198 



Panopticism 


function according to pure theory, the jurists place themselves in 
imagination in the state of nature; in order to see perfect disciplines 
functioning, rulers dreamt of the state of plague. Underlying dis¬ 
ciplinary projects the image of the plague stands for all forms of 
confusion and disorder; just as the image of the leper, cut off from 
all human contact, underlies projects of exclusion. 

They are different projects, then, but not incompatible ones. We 
see them coming slowly together, and it is the peculiarity of the 
nineteenth century that it applied to the space of exclusion of which 
the leper was the symbolic inhabitant (beggars, vagabonds, madmen 
and the disorderly formed the real population) the technique of 
power proper to disciplinary partitioning. Treat ‘lepers’ as ‘plague 
victims’, project the subtle segmentations of discipline onto the 
confused space of internment, combine it with the methods of analy¬ 
tical distribution proper to power, individualize the excluded, but 
use procedures of individualization to mark exclusion - this is what 
was operated regularly by disciplinary power from the beginning 
of the nineteenth century in the psychiatric asylum, the penitentiary, 
the reformatory, the approved school and, to some extent, the 
hospital. Generally speaking, all the authorities exercising individual 
control function according to a double mode; that of binary division 
and branding (mad/sane; dangerous/harmless; normal/abnormal); 
and that of coercive assignment, of differential distribution (who he 
is; where he must be; how he is to be characterized; how he is to be 
recognized; how a constant surveillance is to be exercised over him 
in an individual way, etc.). On the one hand, the lepers are treated as 
plague victims; the tactics of individualizing disciplines are imposed 
on the excluded; and, on the other hand, the universality of disci¬ 
plinary controls makes it possible to brand the ‘leper’ and to bring 
into play against him the dualistic mechanisms of exclusion. The 
constant division between the normal and the abnormal, to which 
every individual is subjected, brings us back to our own time, by 
applying the binary branding and exile of the leper to quite different 
objects; the existence of a whole set of techniques and institutions 
for measuring, supervising and correcting the abnormal brings into 
play the disciplinary mechanisms to which the fear of the plague 
gave rise. All the mechanisms of power which, even today, are 
disposed around the abnormal individual, to brand him and to alter 


199 



Discipline 


him, are composed of those two forms from which they distantly 
derive. 

Bentham’s Panopticon is the architectural figure of this composi¬ 
tion. We know the principle on which it was based: at the periphery, 
an annular building; at the centre, a tower; this tower is pierced with 
wide windows that open onto the inner side of the ring; the peri¬ 
pheric building is divided into cells, each of which extends the whole 
width of the building; they have two windows, one on the inside, 
