
3 Plan of the Panopticon by J. Bentham, 1843. 

4 Plan for a penitentiary by N. Harou-Romain, 1840. 

5 The Maison centrale at Rennes in 1877. 

6 Interior of the penitentiary at Stateville, United States, twentieth 
century. 

7 Bedtime at the reformatory of Mettray. 

8 Lecture on the evils of alcoholism in the auditorium of Fresnes 
prison. 

9 Steam machine for the ‘celeriferous’ correction of young boys and 
girls. 

10 Uorthopedie ou Van de privenir et de corriger dans Us enfanes Us 
diffornUtes du corps (Orthopaedics or the art of preventing and correct¬ 
ing deformities of the body in children) by N. Andry, 1749. 






Translator's Note 


Any closer translation of the French title of this book, Surveiller et pumr, 
has proved unsatisfactory on various counts. To begin with, Foucault 
uses the infinitive, which, as here, may have the effect of an ‘impersonal 
imperative’. Such a nuance is denied us in English. More seriously the verb 
'surveiller’ has no adequate English equivalent. Our noun ‘surveillance’ 
has an altogether too restricted and technical use. Jeremy Bentham used 
the term ‘inspect’ - which Foucault translates as 'surveiller - but the 
range of connotations does not correspond. ‘Supervise’ is perhaps closest 
of all, but again the word has different associations. ‘Observe’ is rather 
too neutral, though Foucault is aware of the aggression involved in any 
one-sided observation. In the end Foucault himself suggested Discipline 
and Punish, which relates closely to the book’s structure. 

Another problem was posed by the French word 'supplice', which heads 
the first part of the book. For the sake of brevity I have entitled this 
first part ‘Torture’, but no single English word will cover the full range 
of the French. Here 'supplied refers specifically to the public torture and 
execution of criminals that provided one of the most popular spectacles of 
eighteenth-century France. By extension the word can also refer to any 
prolonged torture, mental as well as physical. Depending on the context, 
