

The spectacle of the scaffold 


through the body continued, evidence having been confirmed and 
sentence passed, in the actual carrying out of the penalty; and the 
body of the condemned man was once again an essential element in 
the ceremonial of public punishment. It was the task of the guilty 
man to bear openly his condemnation and the truth of the crime 
that he had committed. His body, displayed, exhibited in procession, 
tortured, served as the public support of a procedure that had 
hitherto remained in the shade; in him, on him, the sentence had to 
be legible for all. This immediate, striking manifestation of the 
truth in the public implementation of penalties assumed, in the 
eighteenth century, several aspects. 

1. It made the guilty man the herald of his own condemnation. 
He was given the task, in a sense, of proclaiming it and thus attesting 
to the truth of what he had been charged with: the procession 
through the streets, the placard attached to his back, chest or head 
as a reminder of the sentence; the halts at various crossroads, the 
reading of the sentence, the amende honorable performed at the doors 
of churches, in which the condemned man solemnly acknowledged 
his crime: ‘Barefoot, wearing a shirt, carrying a torch, kneeling, to 
say and to declare that wickedly, horribly, treacherously, he has 
committed the most detestable crime, etc.’; exhibition at a stake 
where his deeds and the sentence were read out; yet another reading 
of the sentence at the foot of the scaffold; whether he was to go 
simply to the pillory or to the stake and the wheel, the condemned 
man published his crime and the justice that had been meted out to 
him by bearing them physically on his body. 

2. It took up once again the scene of the confession. It dupli¬ 
cated the forced proclamation of the amende honorable with a 
spontaneous, public acknowledgement. It established the public 
execution as the moment of truth. These last moments, when the 
guilty man no longer has anything to lose, are won for the full light 
of truth. After the passing of the sentence, the court could decide 
on some new torture to obtain the names of possible accomplices. 
It was also recognized that at the very moment he mounted the 
scaffold the condemned man could ask for a respite in order to make 
new revelations. The public expected this new turn in the course of 
truth. Many made use of it in order to gain time, as did Michel 
Barbier, found guilty of armed assault: ‘He stared impudently at the 


43 


