idleness is the same as in society; it is from the labour of others that 
the convicts live, if they do not exist from their own labour’ (Lucas, 
II, 313-14). The labour by which the convict contributes to his 
own needs turns the thief into a docile worker. This is the utility 
of remuneration for penal labour; it imposes on the convict the 
‘moral’ form of wages as the condition of his existence. Wages 
inculcate the ‘love and habit’ of work (Lucas, II, 243); they give 
those malefactors who do not know the difference between mine 
and thine a sense of property - of ‘what one has earned by the sweat 
of one’s brow’ (Danjou, 210-11; cf. also L'Atelier, 6th year, no. 2, 
November 1845); they also teach those who have lived in dissipa¬ 
tion the virtues of thrift and foresight (Lucas; a third of the prisoner’s 
daily wages was set aside for the day when he left the prison); lastly, 
by proposing a quantity of work to be carried out, they make it 
possible to express quantitatively the convict’s zeal and the progress 
of his improvement (Ducp^tiaux, 30-31). The wages of penal labour 
do not reward production; they function as a motive and measure 
of individual transformation: it is a legal fiction, since it does not 
represent the ‘free’ granting of labour power, but an artifice that 
is presumed to be effective in the techniques of correction. 

What, then, is the use of penal labour.^ Not profit; nor even the 
formation of a useful skill; but the constitution of a power relation, 
an empty economic form, a schema of individual submission and of 
adjustment to a production apparatus. 

The perfect image of prison labour was the women’s workshop 
at Clairvaux; the silent precision of the human machinery is reminis¬ 
cent of the regulated rigour of the convent: ‘On a throne, above 
which is a crucifix, a sister is sitting; before her, arranged in two 
rows, the prisoners are carrying out the task imposed on them, and, 
as needlework accounts for almost all the work, the strictest silence 
is constantly maintained. . . It seems that, in these halls, the very 
air breathes penitence and expiation. One is carried back, as by a 


243 



Prison 


spontaneous movement, to the time of the venerable habits of this 
ancient place, one remembers those voluntary penitents who shut 
themselves up here in order to say farewell to the world’. Compare 
this with the following; ‘Go into a cotton-mill; listen to the con¬ 
versations of the workers and the whistling of the machines. Is there 
any contrast in the world more afflicting than the regularity and 
predictability of these mechanical movements, compared with the 
