
Reanimate the useful, virtuous interest that has been so weakened 
by the crime. The feeling of respect for property - for wealth, but 
also for honour, liberty, life - this the criminal loses when he robs, 
calumniates, abducts or kills. So he must be taught this feeling 
once again. And one will begin by teaching it to him for his own 
benefit; one will show him what it is to lose the freedom to dispose 
as one wishes of one’s own wealth, honour, time and body, so that 
he may respect it in others (Pastoret, I, 49). The penalty that forms 
stable and easily legible signs must also recompose the economy of 
interests and the dynamics of passions. 

3. Consequently, one must use a temporal modulation. The 
penalty transforms, modifies, establishes signs, arranges obstacles. 
What use would it be if it had to be permanent.^ A penalty that had 
no end would be contradictory; all the constraints that it imposes on 
the convict and of which, having become virtuous once more, he 
would never be able to take advantage, would be little better than 
torture; and the effort made to reform him would be so much 
trouble and expense lost by society. If incorrigibles there be, one 
must be determined to eliminate them. But, for all the others, 
punishment can function only if it comes to an end. This analysis 
was accepted by the Constituent Assembly: the code of 1791 lays 
down the death penalty for traitors and murderers; all other penalties 
must have an end (the maximum is twenty years). 

But above all the role of duration must be integrated into the 
economy of the penalty. In its very violence, the public execution 
tended to have the following result: the more serious the crime, the 
shorter the punishment. Duration certainly intervened in the old 


107 



Punishment 


system of penalties; days at the pillory, years of banishment, hours 
spent dying on the wheel. But it was a time of ordeal, not of con¬ 
certed transformation. Duration must now facilitate the proper 
action of the punishment: ‘A prolonged succession of painful priva¬ 
tions, sparing mankind the horror of torture, has much more effect 
on the guilty party than a passing moment of pain... It constantly 
renews in the eyes of the people that witness it the memory of 
vengeful laws and revives in all the moments of a salutary terror.’* 
Time, operator of punishment. 

But the delicate mechanism of the passions must not be con¬ 
strained in the same way or with the same insistence when they 
begin to improve; the punishment should diminish as it produces its 
effects. It may well be fixed, in the sense that it is determined for all, 
in the same way, by law, but its internal mechanism must be variable. 
In the bill put before the Constituent Assembly, Le Peletier pro¬ 
posed a system of diminishing penalties: a convict condemned to 
the most serious penalty would be subjected to the 'cachot' (manacles 
on hands and feet, darkness, solitude, bread and water) only during 
the first stage of his imprisonment; he would be allowed to work 
first two then three days a week. After two thirds of his sentence 
had been served, he could pass to the ‘gene' (a cell with light, chain 
around the waist, solitary work for five hours a day, but with other 
prisoners on the other two days; this work would be paid and would 
enable him to improve his daily fare). Lastly, when he approached 
the end of his sentence, he could pass to the normal prison regime: 
‘He will be allowed every day to meet other prisoners for work in 
common. If he prefers, he will be able to work alone. He will pay 
for his food from what he earns from his work’ (Le Peletier, 329-30). 

4. For the convict, the penalty is a mechanics of signs, interests 
and duration. But the guilty person is only one of the targets of 
punishment. For punishment is directed above all at others, at all 
the potentially guilty. So these obstacle-signs that are gradually 
engraved in the representation of the condemned man must there¬ 
fore circulate rapidly and widely; they must be accepted and redis¬ 
tributed by all; they must shape the discourse that each individual 
has with others and by which crime is forbidden to all by all - the 
true coin that is substituted in people’s minds for the false profits of 
crime. 


108 



The gentle way in punishment 


For this, everyone must see punishment not only as natural, but 
in his own interest; everyone must be able to read in it his own 
advantage. There must be no more spectacular, but useless penalties. 
There must be no secret penalties either; but punishment must be 
regarded as a retribution that the guilty man makes to each of his 
fellow citizens, for the crime that has wronged them all - penalties 
that are constantl}- placed before citizens’ eyes, and which ‘bring out 
the public utility of common and particular movements’ (Dufriche 
de Valaze, 346). The ideal would be for the convict to appear as a 
sort of rentable property: a slave at the service of all. Why would 
society eliminate a life and a body that it could appropriate.^ If 
would be more useful to make him ‘serve the state in a slavery 
