an a priori conception; it is an induction of the social state. There are 
moral diseases, as well as breakdowns in health, where the treatment 
depends on the site and direction of the illness’ (Faucher, 6). This 
involves two essential mechanisms. It must be possible to hold the 
prisoner under permanent observation; every report that can be 
made about him must be recorded and computed. The theme of the 
Panopticon - at once surveillance and observation, security and 
knowledge, individualization and totalization, isolation and trans¬ 
parency - found in the prison its privileged locus of realization. 
Although the panoptic procedures, as concrete forms of the exercise 
of power, have become extremely widespread, at least in their less 
concentrated forms, it was really only in the penitentiary institu¬ 
tions that Bentham’s utopia could be fully expressed in a material 
form. In the 1830s, the Panopticon became the architectural pro¬ 
gramme of most prison projects. It was the most direct way of 
expressing ‘the intelligence of discipline in stone’ (Lucas, I, 69); of 
making architecture transparent to the administration of power;^® 
of making it possible to substitute for force or other violent con¬ 
straints the gentle efficiency of total surveillance; of ordering space 
according to the recent humanization of the codes and the new 
penitentiary theory: ‘The authorities, on the one hand, and the 
architect, on the other, must know, therefore, whether the prisons 
are to be based on the principle of milder penalties or on a system 
of reforming convicts, in accordance with legislation which, by 
getting to the root cause of the people’s vices, becomes a principle 
that will regenerate the virtues that they must practice’ (Baltard, 4-5). 

In short, its task was to constitute a prison-machine*® with a cell 
of visibility in which the inmate will find himself caught as ‘in the 
glass house of the Greek philosopher’ (Harou-Romain, 8) and a 


249 




Prison 


central point from which a permanent gaze may control prisoners 
and staff. Around these two requirements, several variations were 
possible: the Benthamite Panopticon in its strict form, the semi¬ 
circle, the cross-plan, the star shape. In the midst of all these dis¬ 
cussions, the Minister of the Interior in 1841 sums up the funda¬ 
mental principles: ‘The central inspection hall is the pivot of the 
system. Without a central point of inspection, surveillance ceases 
to be guaranteed, continuous and general; for it is impossible to 
have complete trust in the activity, zeal and intelligence of the 
warder who immediately supervises the cells... The architect must 
