day; either he will be forced to hear it standing or kneeling, his 
hands joined, or he will be given some other penance’. 

The order that the disciplinary punishments must enforce is of a 
mixed nature; it is an ‘artificial’ order, explicitly laid down by a law, 
a programme, a set of regulations. But it is also an order defined by 
natural and observable processes: the duration of an apprenticeship, 
the time taken to perform an exercise, the level of aptitude refer to 
a regularity that is also a rule. The children of the Christian Schools 
must never be placed in a ‘lesson’ of which they are not yet capable, 
for this would expose them to the danger of being unable to learn 
anything; yet the duration of each stage is fixed by regulation and a 
pupil who at the end of three examinations has been unable to pass 
into the higher order must be placed, well in evidence, on the bench 
of the ‘ignorant’. In a disciplinary regime punishment involves a 
double juridico-natural reference. 

3. Disciplinary punishment has the function of reducing gaps. 
It must therefore be essentially corrective. In addition to punish¬ 
ments borrowed directly from the judicial model (fines, flogging, 
solitary confinement), the disciplinary systems favour punishments 
that are exercise - intensified, multiplied forms of training, several 
times repeated: the regulations of 1766 for the infantry laid down 
that lance-corporals ‘who show some negligence or lack of willing¬ 
ness will be reduced to the rank of private’, and they will be able 
to rise to their former rank only after new exercises and a new 
examination. As Jean-Baptiste de La Salle put it: ‘Of all penances, 
impositions are the most honest for a teacher, the most advantageous 
for the parents’; they make it possible to ‘derive, from the very 
offences of the children, means of advancing their progress by 
correcting their defects’; to those, for example, ‘who have not written 
all that they were supposed to write or who have not applied 


179 




Discipline 


themselves to doing it well, one can give some impositions to write 
out or to learn by heart’ (La Salle, Conduite . .., 205). Disciplinary 
punishment is, in the main, isomorphic with obligation itself; it is 
not so much the vengeance of an outraged law as its repetition, its 
reduplicated insistence. So much so that the corrective effect expec¬ 
ted of it involves only incidentally expiation and repentance; it is 
obtained directly through the mechanics of a training. To punish 
is to exercise. 

4. In discipline, punishment is only one element of a double 
system: gratification-punishment. And it is this system that operates 
in the process of training and correction. The teacher ‘must avoid, 
as far as possible, the use of punishment; on the contrary, he must 
endeavour to make rewards more frequent than penalties, the lazy 
being more encouraged by the desire to be rewarded in the same 
way as the diligent than by the fear of punishment; that is why it 
will be very beneficial, when the teacher is obliged to use punish¬ 
ment, to win the heart of the child if he can before doing so’ (Demia, 
17). This mechanism with two elements makes possible a number 
of operations characteristic of disciplinary penality. First, the 
definition of behaviour and performance on the basis of the two 
opposed values of good and evil; instead of the simple division of 
the prohibition, as practised in penal justice, we have a distribu¬ 
tion between a positive pole and a negative pole; all behaviour falls 
in the field between good and bad marks, good and bad points. 
Moreover, it is possible to quantify this field and work out an 
arithmetical economy based on it. A penal accountancy, constantly 
brought up to date, makes it possible to obtain the punitive balance- 
sheet of each individual. School ‘justice’, rudiments of which are to 
be found in the army and the workshops, carried this system very 
far. The Brothers of the Christian Schools organized a whole micro¬ 
economy of privileges and impositions; ‘Privileges may be used by 
pupils to gain exemption from penances which have been imposed 
on them. . . For example, a pupil may have been given four or six 
catechism questions to copy out as an imposition; he will be able to 
gain exemption from this penance by accumulating a certain number 
of privilege points; the teacher will assign the number for each 
question. . . Since privileges are worth a certain number of points, 
the teacher also has others of less value, which serve as small change 


180 




The means of correct training 


for the first. For example, a child has an imposition from which he 
can redeem himself with six points; he earns a privilege of ten; 
he presents it to the teacher who gives him back four points, and so 
on’ (La Salle, Condtute ..., i56fF). What we have here is a transposi¬ 
tion of the system of indulgences. And by the play of this quantifica¬ 
tion, this circulation of awards and debits, thanks to the continuous 
calculation of plus and minus points, the disciplinary apparatuses 
hierarchized the ‘good’ and the ‘bad’ subjects in relation , to one 
another. Through this micro-economy of a perpetual penality 
