the parricide, was condemned to death despite a memorandum whose 
astonishing character was no doubt muffled by the brilliance of 
Lacenaire, of his trial, and of his writings, which were, published 
thanks to the head of the Suret^ (censored to some extent), at the 
beginning of 1836, some months before his accomplice Frangois was 
to provide, with the chain-gang of Brest, one of the last great circus 
shows of crime. A circle of illegalities and delinquencies, the circle of 
discourse of crime and on crime. 

21 At the end of the eighteenth century Colquhoun gave some idea of the 
difficulty of the task for a city like London (Colquhoun, 27-9; 293-4). 

22 ‘No other class is subjected to a surveillance of this kind; it is exercised 
almost in the same way as that of released prisoners; it seems to place 
the workers in the category that we now call the dangerous class of 
society’ (JJAtelier, 5th year, no. 6, March 1845). 

23 Apart from the Gazette des tribunaux and the Courrier des tribunaux, 
the Journal des concierges. 

24 Cf. L’Atelier, June 1844, petition to the Chambre de Paris that 
prisoners should be made to do ‘unhealthy and dangerous work’; in 
April 1845, the newspapers quoted a case in Brittany where a large 
number of military convicts died of fever while working on canal¬ 
building. Why were the prisoners not working with mercury or white- 
lead in November 1845.^ ... Cf. also the Democratic politique of the 
years 1844-5. 

25 In VAtelier, of November 1843, there was an attack against the 
Mysteres de Paris because they showed the delinquents in too good a 


323 




Notes 


light, stressing their picturesqueness, their vocabulary, and because 
there was too much emphasis on the fatal character of a proclivity to 
crime. In La Ruche populaire similar attacks on the theatre are to be 
found. 

26 Cf. In La Ruche populaire (December 1839) Vingard replied to an 
article by Balzac published in Le Siicle. Balzac had said that a charge 
of theft was to be made with prudence and discretion when it concerned 
a rich man whose slightest dishonesty immediately became known: 
‘Say, Monsieur, with your hand on your conscience, whether the con¬ 
trary does not occur every day whether, with a great fortune and an 
elevated rank in society, one does not hnd a thousand solutions, a 
thousand means to hush up some unfortunate affair.’ 

27 In La Fratemiti, March 1847, there is a discussion of the Drouillard 
affair and reference is made to thefts in the naval administration at 
Rochefort. In June 1847, there was an article on the Boulmy trial and 
on the Cubi^re-Pellaprat affair; and, in July-August 1847, on the 
Benier-Lagrange-Jussieu affair, which involved misappropriation of 
public funds. 

28 ‘Licensed prostitution, direct material theft, house-breaking, murder, 
brigandage for the lower classes; while skilful spoliation, indirect, 
refined theft, clever exploitation of human cattle, carefully planned 
and brilliantly executed betrayals, transcendent pieces of sharp practice 
in short, all the truly elegant vices and lucrative crimes which the law 
is far too polite to interrupt remain the monopoly of the upper classes’ 
(i December 1838). 

29 Cf., for example, what La Phalange said of Delacollonge or of Elira- 
bide on i August 183d and 2 October 1840. 

3 The carceral 

1 ‘Anything that helps to tire the body helps to expel bad thoughts; so 
care is taken that games consist of violent exercise. At night, they fall 
asleep the moment they touch the pillow’ (Ducp6tiaux, 1854, 375-6). 

2 Cf., for example, the following description of workers’ accommodation 
built at Lille in the mid-nineteenth century: ‘Cleanliness is the order 
of the day. It is the heart of the regulations. There are a number of 
severe provisions against noise, drunkenness, disorders of all kinds. 
A serious offence brings expulsion. Brought back to regular habits of 
order and economy, the workers no longer desert the workshops on 
Mondays. . . The children are better supervised and are no longer a 
cause of scandal. . . Prizes are given for the upkeep of the dwellings. 


324 




Notes 


for good behaviour, for signs of devotion and each year these prizes 
are competed for by a large number of competitors’ (Houz6 de 
I’Aulnay, 13-15). 

