effect than when it interrupted the executioner’s gesture with a letter 
of pardon. The short time that usually elapsed between sentence 
and execution (often a few hours) meant that the pardon usually 
arrived at the very last moment. But the ceremony, by the very 
slowness of its progress, was no doubt arranged to leave room for 
this eventuality. (Cf. Hardy, 30 January 1769, 1 ,125 and 14 Decem¬ 
ber 1779, IV, 229; Anchel, 162-3, story of Antoine Boulle- 

teix, who was already at the foot of the scaffold when a horseman 
arrived carrying the celebrated parchment. Shouts of ‘God save the 
King’ arose and Boulleteix was taken to the tavern, while the clerk 
of the court made a collection on his behalf.) The condemned 
always hoped for a pardon and, in order to drag things out, they 
would pretend, even at the foot of the scaffold, that they had further 
revelations to make. When the people wanted a pardon they called 
for it aloud and tried to postpone the last moment, looking out for 
the arrival of the messenger bearing the letter with the green wax 
seal and if necessary claiming that he was on his way (this happened 
during the execution of those condemned for the uprising against 
child abduction on 3 August 1750). The sovereign was present at 
the execution not only as the power exacting the vengeance of the 
law, but as the power that could suspend both law and vengeance. 
He alone must remain master, he alone could wash away the offences 
committed on his person; although it is true that he delegated to the 
courts the task of exercising his power to dispense justice, he had 
not transferred it; he retained it in its entirety and he could suspend 
the sentence or increase it at will. 

We must regard the public execution, as it was still ritualized in 
the eighteenth century, as a political operation, It was logically 
inscribed in a system of punishment, in which the sovereign, directly 
or indirectly, demanded, decided and carried out punishments, in 
so far as it was he who, through the law, had been injured by the 
crime. In every offence there was a crimen majestatis and in the least 


53 




Torture 


criminal a potential regicide. And the regicide, in turn, was neither 
more nor less, than the total, absolute criminal since, instead of 
attacking, like any offender, a particular decision or wish of the 
sovereign power, he attacked the very principle and physical person 
of the prince. The ideal punishment of the regicide had to constitute 
the summum of all possible tortures. It would be an expression of 
