formulated in the Constituent Assembly, of specific, appropriate, 
effective penalties, constituting, in each case, a lesson for all, became 
the law of detention for every offence of any importance, except 
those requiring the death penalty. The theatre of punishment of 
which the eighteenth century dreamed and which would have acted 
essentially on the minds of the general public was replaced by the 
great uniform machinery of the prisons, whose network of immense 
buildings was to extend across France and Europe. But twenty years 
is perhaps too long a chronology for this conjuring trick. It may 
be argued that it occurred almost instantaneously. One has only to 
look at the bill for the criminal code presented in the Constituent 
Assembly by Le Peletier. The principle stated at the outset is the 
need for ‘exact relations between the nature of the offence and the 
nature of the punishment’: physical pain should be inflicted on those 
who commit crimes of violence, hard labour on the idle, shame on 
those with degraded souls. But the severe penalties actually 




The gentle way in punishment 


proposed are three forms of detention: the 'cachot', in which the 
penalty of imprisonment is augmented by various measures (solitude, 
a deprivation of light, restrictions on food); the'^ene’, in which these 
ancillary measures are attenuated, and lastly imprisonment proper, 
which is reduced to simple confinement. The diversity, so solemnly 
promised, is reduced in the end to this grey, uniform penalty. 
Indeed, at the time, there were deputies who expressed surprise that, 
instead of establishing a natural relation between offences and 
penalties, a quite different plan had been adopted: ‘So that if I have 
betrayed my country, I go to prison; if I have killed my father, I go 
to prison; every imaginable offence is punished in the same uniform 
way. One might as well see a physician who has the same remedy 
for all ills’ (Chabroud, 6i8). 

This prompt substitution was not confined to France. It was to be 
found, to a greater or lesser degree, in other countries. When 
Catherine II, in the years immediately following the treatise Des 
dilits et des peines, gave instructions to the commission entrusted 
with the task of drawing up a ‘new code of laws’, Beccaria’s lesson 
on the specificity and variety of penalties was not forgotten; it was 
repeated almost word for word: ‘It is a triumph of civil liberty when 
the criminal laws derive each penalty from the particular nature of 
each crime. In this way all arbitrariness ceases; the penalty does not 
depend on the caprice of the legislator, but on the nature of the 
thing; it is not man who does violence to man, but the man’s own 
action’ (article 67). A few years later, Beccaria’s general principle 
served as a foundation for the new Tuscan Code and for the new 
