their very incapacity. For these, solitude would merely encourage 
their inertia; they must therefore live in common, but in such a way 
as to form small groups, constantly stimulated by collective 
operations, and subjected to rigid surveillance’ (Ferrus, iSzff and 
zySff). Thus a ‘positive’ knowledge of the delinquents and their 
species, very different from the juridical definition of offences and 
their circumstances, is gradually established; but this knowledge is 
also distinct from the medical knowledge that makes it possible to 
introduce the insanity of the individual and, consequently, to efface 
the criminal character of the act. Ferrus states the principle quite 
clearly: ‘Considered as a whole, criminals are nothing less than 
madmen; it would be unjust to the latter to confuse them with 
consciously perverted men.’ The task of this new knowledge is to 
define the act ‘scientifically’ qua offence and above all the individual 
qua delinquent. Criminology is thus made possible. 

The correlative of penal justice may well be the offender, but the 
correlative of the penitentiary apparatus is someone other; this is the 
delinquent, a biographical unity, a kernel of danger, representing a 
type of anomaly. And, although it is true that to a detention that 
deprives of liberty, as defined by law, the prison added the addi¬ 
tional element of the penitentiary, this penitentiary element intro¬ 
duced in turn a third character who slipped between the individual 
condemned by the law and the individual who carries out this law. 
At the point that marks the disappearance of the branded, dis¬ 
membered, burnt, annihilated body of the tortured criminal, there 


254 




Complete and austere institutions 


appeared the body of the prisoner, duplicated by the individuality 
of the ‘delinquent’, by the little soul of the criminal, which the very 
apparatus of punishment fabricated as a point of application of the 
power to punish and as the object of what is still called today 
penitentiary science. It is said that the prison fabricated delinquents; 
it is true that it brings back, almost inevitably, before the courts those 
who have been sent there. But it also fabricates them in the sense 
that it has introduced into the operation of the law and the offence, 
the judge and the offender, the condemned man and the executioner, 
the non-corporal reality of the delinquency that links them together 
and, for a century and a half, has caught them in the same trap. 

The penitentiary technique and the delinquent are in a sense twin 
brothers. It is not true that it was the discovery of the delinquent 
through a scientific rationality that introduced into our old prisons 
the refinement of penitentiary techniques. Nor is it true that the 
internal elaboration of penitentiary methods has finally brought to 
light the ‘objective’ existence of a delinquency that the abstraction 
and rigidity of the law were unable to perceive. They appeared 
together, the one extending from the other, as a technological 
ensemble that forms and fragments the object to which it applies its 
instruments. And it is this delinquency, formed in the foundations 
of the judicial apparatus, among the ‘basses oeuvres', the servile tasks, 
from which justice averts its gaze, out of the shame it feels in punish¬ 
ing those it condemns, it is this delinquency that now comes to 
haunt the untroubled courts and the majesty of the laws; it is this 
delinquency that must be known, assessed, measured, diagnosed, 
treated when sentences are passed. It is now this delinquency, this 
anomaly, this deviation, this potential danger, this illness, this form 
of existence, that must be taken into account when the codes are 
rewritten. Delinquency is the vengeance of the prison on justice. 
It is a revenge formidable enough to leave the judge speechless. 
It is at this point that the criminologists raise their voices. 

But we must not forget that the prison, that concentrated and 
austere figure of all the disciplines, is not an endogenous element in 
the penal system as defined at the turn of the eighteenth and nine¬ 
teenth centuries. The theme of a punitive society and of a general 
semio-technique of punishment that has sustained the ‘ideological’ 


255 




Prison 


codes - Beccarian or Benthamite - did not itself give rise to the 
universal use of the prison. This prison came from elsewhere - from 
the mechanisms proper to a disciplinary power. Now, despite this 
heterogeneity, the mechanisms and effects of the prison have spread 
right through modern criminal justice; delinquency and the delin¬ 
quents have become parasites on it through and through. One must 
seek the reason for this formidable ‘efficiency’ of the prison. But pne 
thing may be noted at the outset; the penal justice defined in the 
eighteenth century by the reformers traced two possible but diver¬ 
gent lines of objectification of the criminal; the first was the series 
of ‘monsters’, moral or political, who had fallen outside the social 
pact; the second was that of the juridical subject rehabilitated by 
punishment. Now the ‘delinquent’ makes it possible to join the two 
lines and to constitute under the authority of medicine, psychology 
or criminology, an individual in whom the offender of the law and 
