same lines. These members had to visit their respective areas 
regularly. ‘They will strive to eradicate places of ill-repute, tobacco 
shops, life-classes, gaming house, public scandals, blasphemy, im¬ 
piety, and any other disorders that may come to their knowledge.* 
They will also have to make individual visits to the poor; and the 
information to be obtained is laid down in regulations: the stability 
of the lodging, knowledge of prayers, attendance at the sacraments, 
knowledge of a trade, morality (and ‘whether they have not fallen 
into poverty through their own fault’); lastly, ‘one must learn by 
skilful questioning in what way they behave at home. Whether there 
is peace between them and their neighbours, whether they are care¬ 
ful to bring up their children in the fear of God ... whether they do 
not have their older children of different sexes sleeping together and 
with them, whether they do not allow licentiousness and cajolery 
in their families, especially in their older daughters. If one has any 
doubts as to whether they are married, one must ask to see their 
marriage certificate’.* 


212 




Panopticism 


3. The state-control of the mechanisms of discipline. In England, it 
was private religious groups that carried out, for a long time, the 
functions of social discipline (cf. Radzinovitz, 203-14); in France, 
although a part of this role remained in the hands of parish guilds 
or charity associations, another - and no doubt the most important 
part - was very soon taken over by the police apparatus. 

The organization of a centralized police had long been regarded, 
even by contemporaries, as the most direct expression of royal 
absolutism; the sovereign had wished to have ‘his own magistrate to 
whom he might directly entrust his orders, his commissions, inten¬ 
tions, and who was entrusted with the execution of orders and 
orders under the King’s private seal’ (a note by Duval, first secretary 
at the police magistrature, quoted in Funck-Brentano, i). In effect, 
in taking over a number of pre-existing functions - the search for 
criminals, urban surveillance, economic and political supervision - 
the police magistratures and the magistrature-general that presided 
over them in Paris transposed them into a single, strict, administra¬ 
tive machine: ‘All the radiations of force and information that 
spread from the circumference culminate in the magistrate-general. 
... It is he who operates all the wheels that together produce order 
and harmony. The effects of his administration cannot be better 
compared than to the movement of the celestial bodies’ (Des 
