reasons; first, because the confession constituted so strong a proof 


37 




Torture 


that there was scarcely any need to add others, or to enter the diffi¬ 
cult and dubious combinatory of clues; the confession, provided it 
was obtained in the correct manner, almost discharged the prosecu¬ 
tion of the obligation to provide further evidence (in any case, the 
most difficult evidence). Secondly, the only way that this procedure 
might use all its unequivocal authority, and become a real victory 
over the accused, the only way in which the truth might exert all its 
power, was for the criminal to accept responsibility for his own 
crime and himself sign what had been skilfully and obscurely 
constructed by the preliminary investigation. ‘It is not enough’, as 
Ayrault, who did not care for these secret procedures, remarked, 
‘that wrong-doers be justly punished. They must if possible judge 
and condemn themselves’ (Ayrault, i. I, chapter 14). Within the 
crime reconstituted by writing, the criminal who confessed came to 
play the role of living truth. The confession, an act of the criminal, 
responsible and speaking subject, was the complement to the written, 
secret preliminary investigation. Hence the importance that all this 
procedure of an inquisitorial tyjje accorded to the confession. 

Hence, too, the ambiguities of its role. On the one hand, an 
attempt was made to introduce it into the general arithmetic of 
evidence; it was stressed that it was no more than one proof among 
many. It was not the evidentia rev, nor was it the strongest of the 
proofs, it was not in itself enough to bring conviction, it had to be 
accompanied by additional, circumstantial evidence; for it is a well- 
known fact that the accused sometimes declare themselves to be 
guilty of crimes that they have not committed; the examining magis¬ 
trate had therefore to carry out additional investigations if he 
possessed no more than the confession of the accused. But, on the 
other hand, the confession had priority over any other kind of 
evidence. To a certain extent, it transcended all other evidence; an 
element in the calculation of the truth, it was also the act by which 
the accused accepted the charge and recognized its truth; it trans¬ 
formed an investigation carried out without him into a voluntary 
affirmation. Through the confession, the accused himself took part 
in the ritual of producing penal truth. As medieval law put it, the 
confession ‘renders the thing notorious and manifest’. To this first 
ambiguity was added a second; as a particularly strong proof, 
requiring for a conviction only a few additional clues, thus reducing 


38 




The spectacle of the scaffold 


to the minimum the work of investigation and the mechanics of 
demonstration, the confession was therefore highly valued; every 
possible coercion would be used to obtain it. But, although it had 
to be, in the procedure, the living and oral counterpart of the 
written preliminary investigation, although it had to be its reply, 
its authentication, as it were, on the part of the accused, it had to be 
surrounded by guarantees and formalities. It preserved something 
of a transaction; that is why it had to be ‘spontaneous’, why it had 
to be formulated before the competent court, why it had to be made 
in full consciousness, why it should not concern impossible things, 
etc.* Through the confession, the accused committed himself to the 
procedure; he signed the truth of the preliminary investigation. 

This double ambiguity of the confession (an element of proof and 
the counterpart of preliminary investigation; the effect of constraint 
and a semi-voluntary transaction) explains the two great means used 
by classical criminal law to obtain it: the oath that the accused was 
asked to make before his interrogatory (and therefore under threat 
of perjury before both human and divine justice; and, at the same 
time, a ritual act of commitment); judicial torture (physical violence 
to obtain truth, which, in any case, had then to be repeated before 
the judges, as a ‘spontaneous’ confession, if it were to constitute 
proof). At the end of the eighteenth century, torture was to be 
denounced as a survival of the barbarities of another age: the mark 
of a savagery that was denounced as ‘Gothic’. It is true that the 
practice of torture is of ancient origin: it goes back at least as far 
as the Inquisition, of course, and probably to the torture of slaves. 
But it did not figure in classical law as a survival or defect. It occu¬ 
pied a strict place in a complex penal mechanism, in which the 
procedure of an inquisitorial type was reinforced with elements of 
the accusatory system; in which the written demonstration required 
an oral correlative; in which the techniques of proof administered 
by the magistrates were mingled with the methods of the ordeal to 
which the accused was challenged; in which he was called upon — if 
necessary by the most violent persuasion - to play the role of 
voluntary partner in the procedure; in which it was a question, in 
short, of producing truth by a mechanism consisting of two ele¬ 
ments - that of the investigation carried out in secret by the judicial 
authority and that of the act ritually performed by the accused. The 

