acoustic surveillance, operated by means of pipes leading from the 
cells to the central tower. In the Postscript he abandoned the idea, 
perhaps because he could not introduce into it the principle of dis¬ 
symmetry and prevent the prisoners from hearing the inspector as well 
as the inspector hearing them. Julius tried to develop a system of dis¬ 
symmetrical listening (Julius, i8). 

4 Imagining this continuous flow of visitors entering the central tower 
by an underground passage and then observing the circular landscape 
of the Panopticon, was Bentham aware of the Panoramas that Barker 
was constructing at exactly the same period (the first seems to have 
dated from 1787) and in which the visitors, occupying the central 
place, saw unfolding around them a landscape, a city or a battle. The 
visitors occupied exactly the place of the sovereign gaze. 

5 In the second half of the eighteenth century, it was often suggested 
that the army should be used for the surveillance and general partition¬ 
ing of the population. The army, as yet to undergo discipline in the 
seventeenth century, was regarded as a force capable of instilling it. 
Cf., for example, Servan, Le Soldat citoyen, 1780. 

6 Arsenal, MS. 25(35. Under this number, one also finds regulations for 
charity associations of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 

7 Le Maire in a memorandum written at the request of Sartine, in 
answer to sixteen questions posed by Joseph II on the Parisian police. 
This memorandum was published by Gazier in 1879. 

PART FOUR PRISON 

I Complete and austere institutions 

1 The play between the two ‘natures’ of the prison still continues. A few 
days ago [summer 1974] the head of state recalled the ‘principle’ that 
detention ought to be no more than a ‘deprivation of liberty’ - the pure 
essence of imprisonment, freed of the reality of prison; and added that 
the prison could be justified only by its ‘corrective’ or rehabilitating 
effects. 

2 Treilhard, 8-9. The same theme is often to be found in the years 
immediately prior to this: ‘The penalty of detention pronounced by 
the law has above all the object of correcting individuals, that is to say, 
of making them better, of preparing them by trials of shorter or longer 


317 



Notes 
