against the powerful, the refusal of obligations and laws, and organ¬ 
ized crime all came together as chance and fortune would dictate; 
it was the domain of adventure that Gil Bias, Sheppard or Mandrin, 
each in his own way, inhabited. Through the play of disciplinary 
differentiations and divisions, the nineteenth century constructed 
rigorous channels which, within the system, inculcated docility and 
produced delinquency by the same mechanisms. There was a sort of 
disciplinary ‘training’, continuous and compelling, that had some¬ 
thing of the pedagogical curriculum and something of the profes¬ 
sional network. Careers emerged from it, as secure, as predictable, 
as those of public life: assistance associations, residential apprentice¬ 
ships, penal colonies, disciplinary battalions, prisons, hospitals, 
almshouses. These networks were already well mapped out at the 
beginning of the nineteenth century: ‘Our benevolent establish¬ 
ments present an admirably coordinated whole by means of which 
the indigent does not remain a moment without help from the cradle 
to the grave. Follow the course of the unfortunate man: you will 
see him born among foundlings; from there he passes to the nursery, 
then to an orphanage; at the age of six he goes off to primary school 
and later to adult schools. If he cannot work, he is placed on the list 
of the charity offices of his district, and if he falls ill he may choose 
between twelve hospitals. . . Lastly, when the poor Parisian 
reaches the end of his career, seven almshouses await his age and 
often their salubrious regime has prolonged his useless days well 
beyond those of the rich man’ (Moreau de Jonnes, quoted in 
Touquet). 


300 




The carceral 


The carceral network does not cast the unassimilable into a con¬ 
fused hell; there is no outside. It takes back with one hand what it 
seems to exclude with the other. It saves everything, including what 
it punishes. It is unwilling to waste even what it has decided to 
disqualify. In this panoptic society of which incarceration is the 
omnipresent armature, the delinquent is not outside the law; he is, 
from the very outset, in the law, at the very heart of the law, or at 
least in the midst of those mechanisms that transfer the individual 
imperceptibly from discipline to the law, from deviation to offence. 
Although it is true that prison punishes delinquency, delinquency 
is for the most part produced in and by an incarceration which, 
ultimately, prison perpetuates in its turn. The prison is merely the 
natural consequence, no more than a higher degree, of that hier¬ 
archy laid down step by step. The delinquent is an institutional 
product. It is no use being surprised, therefore, that in a consider¬ 
able proportion of cases the biography of convicts passes through 
all these mechanisms and establishments, whose purpose, it is widely 
believed, is to lead away from prison. That one should find in them 
what one might call the index of an irrepressibly delinquent ‘char¬ 
acter’: the prisoner condemned to hard labour was meticulously pro¬ 
duced by a childhood spent in a reformatory, according to the lines 
of force of the generalized carceral system. Conversely, the lyricism 
of marginality may find inspiration in the image of the ‘outlaw’, the 
great social nomad, who prowls on the confines of a docile, fright¬ 
ened order. But it is not on the fringes of society and through succes¬ 
sive exiles that criminality is bom, but by means of ever more 
closely placed insertions, under ever more insistent surveillance, by 
an accumulation of disciplinary coercion. In short, the carceral 
archipelago assures, in the depths of the social body, the formation 
of delinquency on the basis of subtle illegalities, the overlapping of the 
latter by the former and the establishment of a specified criminality. 

3. But perhaps the most important effect of the carceral system 
and of its extension well beyond legal imprisonment is that it suc¬ 
ceeds in making the power to punish natural and legitimate, in 
lowering at least the threshold of tolerance to penality. It tends to 
efface what may be exorbitant in the exercise of punishment. It does 
this by playing the two registers in which it is deployed - the legal 
register of justice and the extra-legal register of discipline - against 


301 



Prison 


one another. In effect, the great continuity of the carceral system 
throughout the law and its sentences gives a sort of legal sanction 
to the disciplinary mechanisms, to the decisions and judgements 
that they enforce. Throughout this network, which comprises so 
many ‘regional’ institutions, relatively autonomous and independent, 
is transmitted, with the ‘prison-form’, the model of justice itself. 
The regulations of the disciplinary establishments may reproduce 
the law, the punishments imitate the verdicts and penalties, the 
surveillance repeat the police model; and, above all these multiple 
establishments, the prison, which in relation to them is a pure form, 
unadulterated and unmitigated, gives them a sort of official sanction. 
The carceral, with its long gradation stretching from the convict- 
ship or imprisonment with hard labour to diffuse, slight limitations, 
communicates a type of power that the law validates and that justice 
uses as its favourite weapon. How could the disciplines and the 
power that functions in them appear arbitrary, when they merely 
