mum extraction of forces and time, continuous genetic accumula¬ 
tion, optimum combination of aptitudes and, thereby, the fabrication 
of cellular, organic, genetic and combinatory individuality. With it 
are ritualized those disciplines that may be characterized in a word 
by saying that they are a modality of power for which individual 
difference is relevant. 

The disciplines mark the moment when the reversal of the political 
axis of individualization - as one might call it - takes place. In 
certain societies, of which the feudal regime is only one example, 
it may be said that individualization is greatest where sovereignty 
is exercised and in the higher echelons of power. The more one 
possesses power or privilege, the more one is marked as an indivi¬ 
dual, by rituals, written accounts or visual reproductions. The ‘name’ 


192 



The means of correct training 


and the genealogy that situate one within a kinship group, the 
performance of deeds that demonstrate superior strength and which 
are immortalized in literary accounts, the ceremonies that mark the 
power relations in their very ordering, the monuments or donations 
that bring survival after death, the ostentation and excess of expendi¬ 
ture, the multiple, intersecting links of allegiance and suzerainty, 
all these are procedures of an ‘ascending’ individualization. In a 
disciplinary regime, on the other hand, individualization is ‘descend¬ 
ing’: as power becomes more anonymous and more functional, 
those on whom it is exercised tend to be more strongly individual¬ 
ized; it is exercised by surveillance rather than ceremonies, by obser¬ 
vation rather than commemorative accounts, by comparative 
measures that have the ‘norm’ as reference rather than genealogies 
giving ancestors as points of reference; by ‘gaps’ rather than by 
deeds. In a system of discipline, the child is more individualized 
than the adult, the patient more than the healthy man, the madman 
and the delinquent more than the normal and the non-delinquent. 
In each case, it is towards the first of these pairs that all the indivi¬ 
dualizing mechanisms are turned in our civilization; and when one 
wishes to individualize the healthy, normal and law-abiding adult, 
it is always by asking him how much of the child he has in him, 
what secret madness lies within him, what fundamental crime he 
has dreamt of committing. All the sciences, analyses or practices 
employing the root ‘psycho-’ have their origin in this historical 
reversal of the procedures of individualization. The moment that 
saw the transition from historico-ritual mechanisms for the forma¬ 
tion of individuality to the scientifico-disciplinary mechanisms, 
