the effectiveness of treatments, map similar cases and the beginnings 
of epidemics. It was the problem of the teaching establishments, 
where one had to define the aptitude of each individual, situate his 
level and his abilities, indicate the possible use that might be made 
of them: ‘The register enables one, by being available in time and 
place, to know the habits of the children, their progress in piety, 
in catechism, in the letters, during the time they have been at the 
School’ (M.I.D.B., 64). 

Hence the formation of a whole series of codes of disciplinary 
individuality that made it possible to transcribe, by means of homo¬ 
genization the individual features established by the examination: 


189 




Discipline 


the physical code of signalling, the medical code of symptoms, the 
educational or military code of conduct or performance. These 
codes were still very crude, both in quality and quantity, but they 
marked a first stage in the ‘formalization’ of the individual within 
power relations. 

The other innovations of disciplinary writing concerned the 
correlation of these elements, the accumulation of documents, their 
seriation, the organization of comparative fields making it possible 
to classify, to form categories, to determine averages, to fix norms. 
The hospitals of the eighteenth century, in particular, were great 
laboratories for scriptuary and documentary methods. The keeping 
of registers, their specification, the modes of transcription from one 
to the other, their circulation during visits, their comparison during 
regular meetings of doctors and administrators, the transmission of 
their data to centralizing bodies (either at the hospital or at the 
central office of the poorhouses), the accountancy of diseases, cures, 
deaths, at the level of a hospital, a town and even of the nation as a 
whole formed an integral part of the process by which hospitals 
were subjected to the disciplinary regime. Among the fundamental 
conditions of a good medical ‘discipline’, in both senses of the word, 
one must include the procedures of writing that made it possible to 
integrate individual data into cumulative systems in such a way that 
they were not lost; so to arrange things that an individual could be 
located in the general register and that, conversely, each datum of 
the individual examination might affect overall calculations. 

Thanks to the whole apparatus of writing that accompanied it, the 
examination opened up two correlative possibilities; firstly, the 
constitution of the individual as a describable, analysable object, not 
in order to reduce him to ‘specific’ features, as did the naturalists in 
relation to living beings, but in order to maintain him in his indivi¬ 
dual features, in his particular evolution, in his own aptitudes or 
abilities, under the gaze of a permanent corpus of knowledge; and, 
secondly, the constitution of a comparative system that made 
possible the measurement of overall phenomena, the description of 
groups, the characterization of collective facts, the calculation of the 
gaps between individuals, their distribution in a given ‘population’. 

These small techniques of notation, of registration, of constituting 
files, of arranging facts in columns and tables that are so familiar 


190 




The means of correct training 


to us now, were of decisive importance in the epistemological ‘thaw’ 
of the sciences of the individual. One is no doubt right to pose the 
Aristotelean problem: is a science of the individual possible and 
legitimate.^ A great problem needs great solutions perhaps. But 
there is the small historical problem of the emergence, towards the 
end of the eighteenth century, of what might generally be termed 
the ‘clinical’ sciences; the problem of the entry of the individual (and > 

no longer the species) into the field of knowledge; the problem of 
the entry of the individual description, of the cross-examination, of 
anamnesis, of the ‘file’ into the general functioning of scientific dis¬ 
course. To this simple question of fact, one must no doubt give an 
answer lacking in ‘nobility’: one should look into these procedures 
of writing and registration, one should look into the mechanisms of 
examination, into the formation of the mechanisms of discipline, and 
of a new type of power over bodies. Is this the birth of the sciences 
of man.^ It is probably to be found in these ‘ignoble’ archives, where 
the modern play of coercion over bodies, gestures and behaviour 
has its beginnings. 

3. The examination, surrounded by all its documentary techniques, 
makes each individual a 'case': a case which at one and the same time 
constitutes an object for a branch of knowledge and a hold for a 
branch of power. The case is no longer, as in casuistry or juris¬ 
prudence, a set of circumstances defining an act and capable of 
modifying the application of a rule; it is the individual as he may be 
described, judged, measured, compared with others, in his very 
