arithmetical rules: two ‘semi-full’ proofs may make a complete proof; 
‘adminicuhs’, providing there are several of them and they concur. 


36 




The spectacle of the scaffold 


may be combined to form a semi-proof; but, however many there 
may be of them, they can never, of themselves, constitute a complete 
proof. We have, then, a penal arithmetic that is meticulous on many 
points, but which still leaves a margin for a good deal of argument; in 
order for a capital sentence to be passed, is a single full proof enough 
or must it be accompanied by other slighter clues.^ Are two approxi¬ 
mate proofs always equivalent to a full proof Should not three be 
required or two plus distant clues.^ Are there elements that may be 
regarded as clues only for certain crimes, in certain circumstances 
and in relation to certain persons (thus evidence is disregarded if it 
comes from a vagabond; it is reinforced, on the contrary, if it is 
provided by ‘a considerable person’ or by a master in the case of a 
domestic offence). It is an arithmetic modulated by casuistry, whose 
function is to define how a legal proof is to be constructed. On the 
one hand, this system of ‘legal proofs’ makes truth in the penal 
domain the result of a complex art; it obeys rules known only to 
specialists, and, consequently, it reinforces the principle of secrecy. 
‘It is not enough that the judge should have the conviction that any 
reasonable man may have. . . Nothing is more incorrect than this 
way of judging, which, in truth, is no other than a more or less well- 
founded opinion.’ But, on the other hand, it is a severe constraint 
for the magistrate; in the absence of this regularity, ‘every sentence 
would be reckless, and in a sense it may be said that it is unjust even 
when, in truth, the accused is guilty’ (Poullain du Parc, 112-13 ~ see 
also Esmein, 260-83 Mittermaier, 15-19). The day will come 
when the singularity of this judicial truth will appear scandalous; 
as if the law did not have to obey the rules of common truth. ‘What 
would be said of a semi-proof in the sciences capable of demonstra¬ 
tion.^ What would a geometrical or algebraic semi-proof amount 
to.^’ (Seigneux de Correvon, 63). But it should not be forgotten 
that these formal constraints on legal proof were a mode of regula¬ 
tion internal to absolute power and exclusive of knowledge. 

Written, secret, subjected, in order to construct its proofs, to 
rigorous rules, the penal investigation was a machine that might 
produce the truth in the absence of the accused. And by this very 
fact, though the law strictly speaking did not require it, this pro¬ 
cedure was to tend necessarily to the confession. And for two 
