in the political technology of the body and of duration, does not 
culminate in a beyond, but tends towards a subjection that has never 
reached its limit. 


The composition of forces 

‘Let us begin by destroying the old prejudice, according to which 
one believed one was increasing the strength of a troop by increasing 
its depth. All the physical laws of movement become chimeras when 
one wishes to adapt them to tactics.’® From the end of the seven¬ 
teenth century, the technical problem of infantry had been freed 
from the physical model of mass. In an army of pikes and muskets - 
slow, imprecise, practically incapable of selecting a target and taking 
aim - troops were used as a projectile, a wall or a fortress: ‘the 
formidable infantry of the army of Spain’; the distribution of soldiers 
in this mass was carried out above all according to their seniority 
and their bravery; at the centre, with the task of providing weight 
and volume, of giving density to the body, were the least experi¬ 
enced; in front, at the angles and on the flanks, were the bravest or 
reputedly most skilful soldiers. In the course of the classical period, 
one passed over to a whole set of delicate articulations. The unit - 
regiment, battalion, section and, later, ‘division’- became a sort 
of machine with many parts, moving in relation to one another, in 
order to arrive at a configuration and to obtain a specific result. 
What were the reasons for this mutation? Some were economic: to 
make each individual useful and the training, maintenance, and 
arming of troops profitable; to give to each soldier, a precious unit. 


162 



Docile bodies 


maximum efficiency. But these economic reasons could become 
determinant only with a technical transformation: the invention of 
the rifle:^' more accurate, more rapid than the musket, it gave 
greater value to the soldier’s skill; more capable of reaching a par¬ 
ticular target, it made it possible to exploit fire-power at an indivi¬ 
dual level; and, conversely, it turned every soldier into a possible 
target, requiring by the same token greater mobility; it involved 
therefore the disappearance of a technique of masses in favour of an 
art tLn distributed units and men along extended, relatively flexible, 
mobile lines. Hence the need to find a whole calculated practice of 
individual and collective dispositions, movements of groups or 
isolated elements, changes of position, of movement from one dis¬ 
position to another; in short, the need to invent a machinery whose 
principle would no longer be the mobile or immobile mass, but a 
geometry of divisible segments whose basic unity was the mobile 
soldier with his rifle;'^ and, no doubt, below the soldier himself, the 
minimal gestures, the elementary stages of actions, the fragments of 
spaces occupied or traversed. 

The same problems arose when it was a question of constituting 
a productive force whose effect had to be superior to the sum of 
elementary forces that composed it: ‘The combined working-day 
produces, relatively to an equal sum of working-days, a greater 
quantity of use-values, and, consequently, diminishes the labour¬ 
time necessary for the production of a given useful effect. Whether 
the combined working-day, in a given case, acquires this increased 
productive power, because it heightens the mechanical force of 
labour, or extends its sphere of action over a greater space, or con¬ 
tracts the field of production relatively to the scale of production, 
or at the critical moment sets large masses of labour to work... the 
special productive power of the combined working-day is, under 
all circumstances, the social productive power of labour, or the 
productive power of social labour. This power is due to cooperation 
itself’ (Marx, Capital, vol. i, 311-12). On several occasions, Marx 
stresses the analogy between the problems of the division of labour 
and those of military tactics. For example: ‘Just as the offensive 
power of a squadron of cavalry, or the defensive power of a regi¬ 
ment of infantry, is essentially different from the sum of the offen¬ 
sive or defensive powers of the individual cavalry or infantry 


163 



Discipline 


soldiers taken separately, so the sum total of the mechanical forces 
exerted by isolated workmen differs from the social force that is 
developed, when many hands take part simultaneously in one and 
the same undivided operation’ (Marx, Capital, vol. i, 308). 

Thus a new demand appears to which discipline must respond: to 
construct a machine whose effect will be maximized by the concerted 
articulation of the elementary parts of which it is composed. Disci¬ 
pline is no longer simply an art of distributing bodies, of extracting 
time from them and accumulating it, but of composing forces in 
order to obtain an efficient machine. This demand is expressed in 
several ways. 

1. The individual body becomes an element that may be placed, 
moved, articulated on others. Its bravery or its strength are no 
