that the body and pain are not the ultimate objects of its punitive 
action. Today a doctor must watch over those condemned to death, 
right up to the last moment - thus juxtaposing himself as the agent 
of welfare, as the alleviator of pain, with the official whose task it is 
to end life. This is worth thinking about. When the moment of 
execution approaches, the patients are injected with tranquillizers. 
A utopia of judicial reticence: take away life, but prevent the patient 
from feeling it; deprive the prisoner of all rights, but do not inflict 
pain; impose penalties free of all pain. Recourse to psycho-pharma¬ 
cology and to various physiological ‘disconnectors’, even if it is 
temporary, is a logical consequence of this ‘non-corporal’ penality. 

The modern rituals of execution attest to this double process: the 
disappearance of the spectacle and the elimination of pain. The same 
movement has affected the various European legal systems, each at 


II 




Torture 


its own rate: the same death for all - the execution no longer bears 
the specific mark of the crime or the social status of the criminal; a 
death that lasts only a moment - no torture must be added to it in 
advance, no further actions performed upon the corpse; an execution 
that affects life rather than the body. There are no longer any of 
those long processes in which death was both retarded by calculated 
interruptions and multiplied by a series of successive attacks. There 
are no longer any of those combinations of tortures that were 
organized for the killing of regicides, or of the kind advocated, at 
the beginning of the eighteenth century, by the anonymous author 
of Hanging not Punishment Enough (1701), by which the condemned 
man would be broken on the wheel, then flogged until he fainted, 
then hung up with chains, then finally left to die slowly of hunger. 
There are no longer any of those executions in which the condemned 
man was dragged along on a hurdle (to prevent his head smashing 
against the cobble-stones), in which his belly was opened up, his 
entrails quickly ripped out, so that he had time to see them, with his 
own eyes, being thrown on the fire; in which he was finally decapi¬ 
tated and his body quartered.^ The reduction of these ‘thousand 
deaths’ to strict capital punishment defines a whole new morality 
concerning the act of punishing. 

As early as i7<5o, a hanging machine had been tried out in 
England (for the execution of Lord Ferrer). It made use of a support, 
which opened under the feet of the condemned man, thus avoiding 
