century, a new legislation defined the power to punish as a general 
function of society that was exercised in the same manner over all its 
members, and in which each individual was equally represented: but 
in making detention the penalty par excellence, it introduced proce¬ 
dures of domination characteristic of a particular type of power. A 


Prison 


justice that is supposed to be ‘equal’, a legal machinery that is 
supposed to be ‘autonomous’, but which contains all the asymmetries 
of disciplinary subjection, this conjunction marked the birth of the 
prison, ‘the penalty of civilized societies’ (Rossi, 169). 

One can understand the self-evident character that prison punish¬ 
ment very soon assumed. In the first years of the nineteenth century, 
people were still aware of its novelty; and yet it appeared so bound 
up and at such a deep level with the very functioning of soci¬ 
ety that it banished into oblivion all the other punishments that 
the eighteenth-century reformers had imagined. It seemed to have 
no alternative, as if carried along by the very movement of histor)^ 
‘It is not chance, it is not the whim of the legislator that have made 
imprisonment the base and almost the entire edifice of our present 
penal scale: it is the progress of ideas and the improvement in 
morals’ (Van Meenan, 529-30). And, although, in a little over a 
century, this self-evident character has become transformed, it has 
not disappeared. We are aware of all the inconveniences of prison, 
and that it is dangerous when it is not useless. And yet one cannot 
‘see’ how to replace it. It is the detestable solution, which one seems 
unable to do without. 

This ‘self-evident’ character of the prison, which we find so diffi¬ 
cult to abandon, is based first of all on the simple form of ‘depriva¬ 
tion of liberty’. How could prison not be the penalty par excellence 
in a society in which liberty is a good that belongs to all in the same 
way and to which each individual is attached, as Duport put it, by 
a ‘universal and constant’ feeling.^ Its loss has therefore the same 
value for all; unlike the fine, it is an ‘egalitarian’ punishment. The 
prison is the clearest, simplest, most equitable of penalties. More¬ 
over, it makes it possible to quantify the penalty exactly according 
to the variable of time. There is a wages-form of imprisonment that 
constitutes, in industrial societies, its economic ‘self-evidence’ - and 
enables it to appear as a reparation. By levying on the time of the 
prisoner, the prison seems to express in concrete terms the idea that 
the offence has injured, beyond the victim, society as a whole. There 
is an economico-moral self-evidence of a penality that metes out 
punishments in days, months and years and draws up quantitative 
equivalences between offences and durations. Hence the express¬ 
ion, so frequently heard, so consistent with the functioning of 


232 



Complete and austere institutions 


punishments, though contrary to the strict theory of penal law, 
that one is in prison in order to ‘pay one’s debt’. The prison is 
‘namral’, just as the use of time to measure exchanges is ‘natural’ 
in our society.^ 

But the self-evidence of the prison is also based on its role, 
supposed or demanded, as an apparatus for transforming individuals. 
How could the prison not be immediately accepted when, by locking 
up, retraining and rendering docile, it merely reproduces, with a 
little more emphasis, all the mechanisms that are to be found in the 
social body? The prison is like a rather disciplined barracks, a strict 
school, a dark workshop, but not qualitatively different. This double 
foundation - juridico-economic on the one hand, technico-disciplin- 
ary on the other - made the prison seem the most immediate and 
civilized form of all penalties. And it is this double functioning that 
immediately gave it its solidity. One thing is clear: the prison was 
not at first a deprivation of liberty to which a technical function of 
correction was later added; it was from the outset a form of ‘legal 
detention’ entrusted with an additional corrective task, or an enter¬ 
prise for reforming individuals that the deprivation of liberty 
allowed to function in the legal system. In short, penal imprison¬ 
ment, from the beginning of the nineteenth century, covered both 
the deprivation of liberty and the technical transformation of 
individuals. 

Let us remember a number of facts. In the codes of 1808 and i8io, 
and the measures that immediately preceded or followed them, 
imprisonment was never confused with mere deprivation of liberty. 
It was, or in any case had to be, a differentiated and finalized mechan¬ 
ism. Differentiated because it had to have the same form, whether 
the prisoner had been sentenced or was merely accused, whether he 
was a minor offender or a criminal: the various types of prison - 
maison d’arret, maison de correction, maison centrale — ought in 
principle to correspond more or less to these differences and provide 
a punishment that would be not only graduated in intensity, but 
diversified in its ends. For the prison has a purpose, which is laid 
down at the outset: ‘The law inflicting penalties, some of which are 
more serious than others, cannot allow the individual condemned 
to light penalties to be imprisoned in the same place as the criminal 
condemned to more serious penalties_although the penalty fixed 

