
concerned only the way in which isolation should be used, it being 
accepted by all. 

The Auburn model prescribed the individual cell during the 
night, work and meals in common, but under the rule of absolute 
silence, the convicts being allowed to speak only to the warders, 
with their permission and in a low voice. It was a clear reference to 
the monastic model; a reference, too, to the discipline of the work¬ 
shop. The prison must be the microcosm of a perfect society in 
which individuals are isolated in their moral existence, but in which 
they come together in a strict hierarchical framework, with no 
lateral relation, communication being possible only in a vertical 
direction. The advantage of the Auburnian system, according to its 
advocates, was that it formed a duplication of society itself. Con¬ 
straint was assured by material means, but above all by a rule that 
one had to learn to respect and which was guaranteed by surveillance 
and punishment. Rather than keep the convicts ‘under lock and key 
like wild beasts in their cages’, they must be brought together, 
‘made to join together in useful exercises, forced together to adopt 
good habits, preventing moral contagion by active surveillance, 
maintaining reflection by the rule of silence’; this rule accustoms the 
convict ‘to regard the law as a sacred precept whose violation brings 
just and legitimate harm’ (Mittermaier, in Revue fran<iaise et itrangere 
de Ugislation, 1836). Thus this operation of isolation, assembly 
without communication and law guaranteed by uninterrupted 
supervision, must rehabilitate the criminal as a social individual: it 
trains him to a ‘useful and resigned activity’ (Gasparin); it restores 
for him ‘habits of sociability’ (Beaumont and Tocqueville, 112). 

In absolute isolation - as at Philadelphia - the rehabilitation of 
the criminal is expected not of the application of a common law, 
but of the relation of the individual to his own conscience and to 
what may enlighten him from within.’ ‘Alone in his cell, the convict 
is handed over to himself; in the silence of his passions and of the 
world that surrounds him, he descends into his conscience, he 
questions it and feels awakening within him the moral feeling that 
never entirely perishes in the heart of man’ {Journal des economistes, 
II, 1842). It is not, therefore, an external respect for the law or fear 
of punishment alone that will act upon the convict but the workings 
of the conscience itself. A profound submission, rather than a super- 


238 




Complete and austere institutions 


ficial training; a change of ‘morality’, rather than of attitude. In the 
Pennsylvanian prison, the only operations of correction were the 
conscience and the silent architecture that confronted it. At Cherry 
Hill, ‘the walls are the punishment of the crime; the cell confronts 
the convict with himself; he is forced to listen to his conscience’. 
Hence work there is more in the nature of a consolation than an 
obligation; supervisors do not have to exert force - this is assured 
by the materiality of things - and consequently, their authority may 
be accepted: ‘At each visit, a few benevolent words flow from this 
honest mouth and bring to the heart of the inmate gratitude, hope 
and consolation; he loves his warder; and he loves him because he 
is gentle and sympathetic. Walls are terrible, but man is good’ 
(Blouet). In this closed cell, this temporary sepulchre, the myths of 
resurrection arise easily enough. After night and silence, the regener¬ 
ated life. Auburn was society itself reduced to its bare essentials. 
Cherry Hill was life annihilated and begun again. Catholicism soon 
absorbed this Quaker technique into its discourses. ‘I see your cell 
as no more than a frightful sepulchre where, instead of worms, 
remorse and despair come to gnaw at you and to turn your existence 
into a hell in anticipation. But... what is for an irreligious prisoner 
merely a tomb, a repulsive ossuary, becomes, for the sincerely 
Christian convict, the very cradle of blessed immortality.’® 

A whole series of different conflicts stemmed from the opposition 
between these two models: religious (must conversion be the princi¬ 
pal element of correction.^), medical (does total isolation drive 
convicts insane?), economic (which method costs less?), architec¬ 
tural and administrative (which form guarantees the best surveil¬ 
lance?). This, no doubt, was why the argument lasted so long. But, 
at the heart of the debate, and making it possible, was this primary 
objective of carceral action: coercive individualization, by the 
termination of any relation that is not supervised by authority or 
arranged according to hierarchy. 

2. ‘Work alternating with meals accompanies the convict to 
evening prayer; then a new sleep gives him an agreeable rest that is 
not disturbed by the phantoms of an unregulated imagination. Thus 
the six weekdays pass by. They are followed by a day devoted 
exclusively to prayer, instruction and salutary meditations. Thus 
the weeks, the months, the years follow one another; thus the 




Prison 


prisoner who, on entering the establishment, was an inconstant 
man, or one who was single-minded only in his irregularity, seeking 
