had given to her criminal law; above all, no doubt, because she did 
not wish to diminish the rigour of her penal laws during the great 
social disturbances of the years 1780-1820. For a long time Romilly, 
Mackintosh and Fowell Buxton failed in their attempts to attenuate 
the multiplicity and severity of the penalties laid down by English 
law - that ‘horrible butchery’, as Rossi described it. Its severity (in 
fact, the juries regarded the penalties laid down as excessive and 
were consequently more lenient in their application) had even 
increased: in 1760, Blackstone had listed 160 capital crimes in 
English legislation, while by 1819 there were 223. One should also 
take into account the advances and retreats that the process as a 
whole underwent between 1760 and 1840; the rapidity of reform 


14 




The body of the condemned 


in certain countries such as Austria, Russia, the United States, 
France under the Constituent Assembly, then the retreat at the 
time of the counter-revolutions in Europe and the great social fear 
of the years 1820-48; more or less temporary changes introduced by 
emergency courts or laws; the gap between the laws and the real 
practice of the courts (which was by no means a faithful reflection 
of the state of legislation). All these factors account for the irregu¬ 
larity of the transformation that occurred at the turn of the century. 

It should be added that, although most of the changes had been 
achieved by 1840, although the mechanisms of punishment had by 
then assumed their new way of functioning, the process was far 
from complete. The reduction in the use of torture was a tendency 
that was rooted in the great transformation of the years 1760-1840, 
but it did not end there; it can be said that the practice of the public 
execution haunted our penal system for a long time and still haunts 
it today. In France, the guillotine, that machine for the production 
of rapid and discreet deaths, represented a new ethic of legal death. 
But the Revolution had immediately endowed it with a great theatri¬ 
cal ritual. For years it provided a spectacle. It had to be removed to 
the Barri^re Saint-Jacques; the open cart was replaced by a closed 
carriage; the condemned man was hustled from the vehicle straight 
to the scaffold; hasty executions were organized at unexpected times. 
In the end, the guillotine had to be placed inside prison walls and 
made inaccessible to the public (after the execution of Weidmann 
in 1939), by blocking the streets leading to the prison in which the 
scaffold was hidden, and in which the execution would take place in 
secret (the execution of Buffet and Bontemps at the Sante in 1972). 
Witnesses who described the scene could even be prosecuted, there¬ 
by ensuring that the execution should cease to be a spectacle and 
remain a strange secret between the law and those it condemns. One 
has only to point out so many precautions to realize that capital 
punishment remains fundamentally, even today, a spectacle that 
must actually be forbidden. 

Similarly, the hold on the body did not entirely disappear in the 
mid-nineteenth century. Punishment had no doubt ceased to be 
centred on torture as a technique of pain; it assumed as its principal 
object loss of wealth or rights. But a punishment like forced labour 
or even imprisonment — mere loss of liberty - has never functioned 


15 




Torture 


without a certain additional element of punishment that certainly 
concerns the body itself: rationing of food, sexual deprivation, 
corporal punishment, solitary confinement. Are these the uninten¬ 
tional, but inevitable, consequence of imprisonment.^ In fact, in its 
most explicit practices, imprisonment has always involved a certain 
degree of physical pain. The criticism that was often levelled at the 
penitentiary system in the early nineteenth century (imprisonment 
is not a sufficient punishment: prisoners are less hungry, less cold, 
less deprived in general than many poor people or even workers) 
suggests a postulate that was never explicitly denied: it is just that a 
condemned man should suffer physically more than other men. It is 
difficult to dissociate punishment from additional physical pain. 
What would a non-corporal punishment be.^ 

There remains, therefore, a trace of ‘torture’ in the modern 
mechanisms of criminal justice — a trace that has not been entirely 
overcome, but which is enveloped, increasingly, by the non-corporal 
nature of the penal system. 

The reduction in penal severity in the last 200 years is a pheno¬ 
menon with which legal historians are well acquainted. But, for a 
long time, it has been regarded in an overall way as a quantitative 
phenomenon: less cruelty, less pain, more kindness, more respect, 
more ‘humanity’. In fact, these changes are accompanied by a dis¬ 
placement in the very object of the punitive operation. Is there a 
diminution of intensity.^ Perhaps. There is certainly a change of 
objective. 

