set of techniques, a whole corpus of methods and knowledge, 
descriptions, plans and data. And from such trifles, no doubt, the 
man of modern humanism was bom.’ 


The art of distributions 

In the first instance, discipline proceeds from the distribution of in¬ 
dividuals in space. To achieve this end, it employs several techniques. 

I. Discipline sometimes requires enclosure, the specification of a 
place heterogeneous to all others and closed in upon itself. It is the 
protected place of disciplinary monotony. There was the great 
‘confinement’ of vagabonds and paupers; there were other more 
discreet, but insidious and effective ones. There were the colleges, 
or secondary schools: the monastic model was gradually imposed; 
boarding appeared as the most perfect, if not the most frequent, 
educational regime; it became obligatory at Louis-le-Grand when, 
after the departure of the Jesuits, it was turned into a model school 
(cf. Ari^s, 308-13 and Snyders, 35-41). There were the military 




Discipline 


barracks: the army, that vagabond mass, has to be held in place; 
looting and violence must be prevented; the fears of local inhabi¬ 
tants, who do not care for troops passing through their towns, 
must be calmed; conflicts with the civil authorities must be avoided; 
desertion must be stopped, expenditure controlled. The ordinance 
of 1719 envisaged the construction of several hundred barracks, 
on the model of those already set up in the south of the country; 
there would be strict confinements: ‘The whole will be enclosed by 
an outer wall ten feet high, which will surround the said houses, at 
a distance of thirty feet from ail the sides’; this will have the effect 
of maintaining the troops in ‘order and discipline, so that an officer 
will be in a position to answer for them’ {L’Ordonnance militaire, 
IXL, 25 September 1719). In 1745, there were barracks in about 
320 towns; and it was estimated that the total capacity of the bar¬ 
racks in 1775 was approximately 200,000 men (Daisy, 201-9; ®n 
anonymous memoir of 1775, in Dep6t de la guerre, 3689, f. 156; 
Navereau, 132-5). Side by side with the spread of workshops, there 
also developed great manufacturing spaces, both homogeneous and 
well defined: first, the combined manufactories, then, in the second 
half of the eighteenth century, the works or factories proper (the 
Chaussade ironworks occupied almost the whole of the Medine 
peninsula, between Ni^vre and Loire; in order to set up the Indret 
factory in 1777, Wilkinson, by means of embankments and dikes, 
constructed an island on the Loire; Toufait built Le Creusot in the 
valley of the Charbonni^re, which he transformed, and he had 
workers’ accommodation built in the factory itself); it was a change 
of scale, but it was also a new type of control. The factory was 
explicitly compared with the monastery, the fortress, a walled town; 
the guardian ‘will open the gates only on the return of the workers, 
and after the bell that announces the resumption of work has been 
rung’; a quarter of an hour later no one will be admitted; at the end 
of the day, the workshops’ heads will hand back the keys to the Swiss 
guard of the factory, who will then open the gates {Amboise, f. 
12,1301). The aim is to derive the maximum advantages and to 
neutralize the inconveniences (thefts, interruptions of work, dis¬ 
turbances and ‘cabals’), as the forces of production become more 
concentrated; to protect materials and tools and to master the labour 
force: ‘The order and inspection that must be maintained require 


142 




Docile bodies 


that all workers be assembled under the same roof, so that the part¬ 
ner who is entrusted with the management of the manufactory may 
prevent and remedy abuses that may arise among the workers and 
arrest their progress at the outset’ (Dauphin, 199). 

2. But the principle of ‘enclosure’ is neither constant, nor indis¬ 
pensable, nor sufficient in disciplinary machinery. This machinery 
works space in a much more flexible and detailed way. It does this 
first of all on the principle of elementary location or partitioning. 
Each individual has his own place; and each place its individual. 
Avoid distributions in groups; break up collective dispositions; 
analyse confused, massive or transient pluralities. Disciplinary space 
tends to be divided into as many sections as there are bodies or 
elements to be distributed. One must eliminate the effects of impre¬ 
cise distributions, the uncontrolled disappearance of individuals, 
their diffuse circulation, their unusable and dangerous coagulation; 
it was a tactic of anti-desertion, anti-vagabondage, anti-concentra¬ 
tion. Its aim was to establish presences and absences, to know where 
and how to locate individuals, to set up useful communications, to 
interrupt others, to be able at each moment to supervise the conduct 
of each individual, to assess it, to judge it, to calculate its qualities 
or merits. It was a procedure, therefore, aimed at knowing, master¬ 
ing and using. Discipline organizes an analytical space. 

And there, too, it encountered an old architectural and religious 
