the penalty. Though the sentence and the reasons for it should be 
known to all, the penalty should be carried out in secret; the public 


124 



The gentle way in punishment 


was to intervene neither as a witness, nor as a guarantor of punish¬ 
ment; the certainty that, behind the walls, the prisoner was serving 
his sentence must suffice as an example: there were to be no more 
of those street spectacles which the law of 1786 has given rise to by 
imposing on certain prisoners public works to be carried out in 
towns and on the highways.The punishment and correction that 
it must operate are processes that unfold between the prisoner and 
those who supervise him. They are processes that effect a transforma¬ 
tion of the individual as a whole - of his body and of his habits by 
the daily work that he is forced to perform, of his mind and his will 
by the spiritual attentions that are paid to him: ‘Bibles and other 
books of religious practice are provided; the clergy of the different 
obediences to be found in the town and suburbs perform the services 
once a week and any other edifying person may have access to the 
prisoners at any time’ (Teeters, 1935, 53-4). But this transformation 
is entrusted to the administration itself. Solitude and self-examina¬ 
tion are not enough; nor are purely religious exhortations. Work on 
the prisoner’s soul must be carried out as often as possible. The 
prison, though an administrative apparatus, will at the same time be 
a machine for altering minds. On first entering the prison, the 
prisoner will be read the regulations; ‘at the same time, the inspectors 
seek to strengthen in him the moral obligations that he now has; 
they represent to him the offence that he has committed with regard 
to them, the evil that has consequently resulted for the society that 
protected him and the need to make compensation by his example 
and his amendment. They then make him promise to do his duty 
gladly, to behave decently, promising him or allowing him to hope 
that, before the expiration of the term of the sentence, he will be 
able to obtain his discharge if he behaves well. . . From time to 
time the inspectors make it their duty to converse with the criminals 
one after the other, concerning their duties as men and as members 
of society’ (Turnbull, 27). 

But no doubt the most important thing was that this control and 
transformation of behaviour were accompanied - both as a condition 
and as a consequence - by the development of a knowledge of the 
individuals. When the new prisoner arrived, the Walnut Street 
administration received a report concerning his crime, the circum¬ 
stances in which it was committed, a summary of the examinations 
