speech of the criminal. Justice required these apocrypha in order to 
be grounded in truth. Its decisions were thus surrounded by all 
these posthumous ‘proofs’. Sometimes, too, accounts of crimes and 
infamous lives were published, simply as propaganda, before any 
trial had taken place, in order to force the hand of a court that was 
suspected of being too tolerant. In order to discredit smugglers, the 
Compagnie des Fermes published ‘bulletins’ recounting their 
crimes: in 1768, it distributed broadsheets against a certain Mon- 
tagne, the leader of a gang, of whom the writer himself says: ‘Some 
thefts have been ascribed to him the truth of which is somewhat 
uncertain ...; Montagne has been depicted as a wild beast, a second 
hyena to be hunted down; given the hotheads of the Auvergne, this 
idea has caught on’ (cf. Juillard, 24). 


66 




The spectacle of the scaffold 


But the effect, like the use, of this literature was equivocal. The 
condemned man found himself transformed into a hero by the sheer 
extent of his widely advertised crimes, and sometimes the affirmation 
of his belated repentance. Against the law, against the rich, the 
powerful, the magistrates, the constabulary or the watch, against 
taxes and their collectors, he appeared to have waged a struggle 
with which one all too easily identified. The proclamation of these 
crimes blew up to epic proportions the tiny struggle that passed 
unperceived in everyday life. If the condemned man was shown to 
be repentant, accepting the verdict, asking both God and man for 
forgiveness for his crimes, it was as if he had come through some 
process of purification: he died, in his own way, like a saint. But 
indomitability was an alternative claim to greatness: by not giving 
in under torture, he gave proof of a strength that no power had 
succeeded in bending: ‘On the day of the execution - this will seem 
scarcely credible -1 showed no trace of emotion, as I performed my 
amende honorable^ and when I finally lay down on the cross I showed 
no fear’ (the Complainte of J.-D. Langlade, executed at Avignon 
12 April 1768). Black hero or reconciled criminal, defender of the 
true right or an indomitable force, the criminal of the broadsheets, 
pamphlets, almanacs and adventure stories brought with him, be¬ 
neath the apparent morality of the example not to be followed, a 
whole memory of struggles and confrontations. A convicted criminal 
could become after his death a sort of saint, his memory honoured 
and his grave respected. (This was the case of Tanguy, executed in 
Brittany about 1740. Before being convicted, it is true, he had begun 
a long penitence ordered by his confessor. Was this a conflict 
between civil justice and religious penitence.^ Cf. Corre, 21.) The 
criminal has been almost entirely transformed into a positive hero. 
There were those for whom glory and abomination were not dis¬ 
sociated, but coexisted in a reversible figure. Perhaps we should see 
this literature of crime, which proliferated around a few exemplary 
figures,® neither as a spontaneous form of ‘popular expression’, nor 
as a concerted programme of propaganda and moralization from 
above; it was a locus in which two investments of penal practice 
met - a sort of battleground around the crime, its punishment and 
its memory. If these accounts were allowed to be printed and circu¬ 
lated, it was because they were expected to have the effect of an 


67 




Torture 


ideological control - the printing and the distribution of these 
almanacs, broadsheets, etc. was in principle subject to strict control. 
But if these true stories of everyday history were received so avidly, 
if they formed part of the basic reading of the lower classes, it was 
because people found in them not only memories, but also prece¬ 
dents; the interest of‘curiosity’ is also a political interest. Thus these 
texts may be read as two-sided discourses, in the facts that they 
relate, in the effects they give to these facts and in the glory they 
confer on those ‘illustrious’ criminals, and no doubt in the very 
words they use (one should study the use of such categories as 
‘misfortune’ or ‘abomination’ or such epithets as ‘famous’ or 
‘lamentable’ in accounts such as The History of the Life, Great 
Robberies and Tricks of Guilleri and his Companions and of their 
Lamentable and Unhappy End.^ 

Perhaps we should compare this literature with the ‘disturbances 
around the scaffold’ in which, through the tortured body of the 
criminal, the power that condemned confronted the people that was 
the witness, the participant, the possible and indirect victim of this 
execution. In the wake of a ceremony that inadequately channelled 
the power relations it sought to ritualize, a whole mass of discourses 
appeared pursuing the same confrontation; the posthumous pro¬ 
clamation of the crimes justified justice, but also glorified the cri^ 
minal. That was why the reformers of the penal system were soon 
demanding suppression of these broadsheets.’ That was why the 
people showed so lively an interest in what served more or less as 
the minor, everyday epic of illegalities. That was why the broad¬ 
sheets lost their importance as the political function of popular 
illegality altered. 
