fixed in definite relations of domination: ‘Who do you work with.^ 
That is to say, since you are not a master, you must be a servant, 
whatever your station; it is not a question of your satisfactoriness as 
an individual; it is a question of order to be maintained.’ Confronted 
with discipline on the face of the law, there is illegality, which puts 
itself forward as a right; it is indiscipline, rather than the criminal 
offence, that causes the rupture. An indiscipline of language: 
incorrect grammar and the tone of the replies ‘indicate a violent 


291 




Prison 


split between the accused and society, which, through the judge, 
addresses him in correct terms’. An indiscipline that is the indisci¬ 
pline of native, immediate liberty: ‘He is well aware that the appren¬ 
tice, the worker is a slave and that slavery is sad. . . This liberty, 
this need of movement that possesses him, he is well aware that he 
would no longer enjoy it in a life of ordinary order. . . He prefers 
liberty; what does he care if others see it as disorder.^ It is liberty, 
that is to say, the most spontaneous development of his individual¬ 
ity, a wild development and, consequently, brutal and limited, but a 
natural, instinctive development.’ Indiscipline in family relations; 
it does not matter whether this lost child was abandoned or freed 
himself voluntarily, for ‘he would have been unable to bear the 
slavery of education either at his parents’ or with strangers’. And 
through all these minute disciplines it is ultimately ‘civilization’ as a 
whole that is rejected and ‘wildness’ that emerges: ‘It is work, it is 
laziness, it is thoughtlessness, it is debauchery: it is everything except 
order; the difference in occupations and debauches aside, it is the 
life of the savage, living from day to day and with no tomorrow’ 
{La Phalange, 15 August 1840). 

No doubt the analyses of La Phalange cannot be regarded as 
representative of the discussions that took place in the workers’ press 
at this time on crime and penality. Nevertheless, they are situated in 
the context of this polemic. The lessons of La Phalange were not 
quite wasted. They found an echo when, in the second half of the 
nineteenth century, taking the penal apparatus as their point of 
attack, the anarchists posed the political problem of delinquency; 
when they thought to recognize in it the most militant rejection of 
the law; when they tried not so much to heroize the revolt of the 
delinquents as to disentangle delinquency from the bourgeois legality 
and illegality that had colonized it; when they wished to re-establish 
or constitute the political unity of popular illegalities. 
