be claimed, the hypothesis of insanity, in any case of anomaly. And 
the sentence that condemns or acquits is not simply a judgement of 
guilt, a legal decision that lays down punishment; it bears within it 


20 




The body of the condemned 


an assessment of normality and a technical prescription for a possible 
normalization. Today the judge - magistrate or juror - certainly does 
more than ‘judge’. 

And he is not alone in judging. Throughout the penal procedure 
and the implementation of the sentence there swarms a whole 
series of subsidiary authorities. Small-scale legal systems and 
parallel judges have multiplied around the principal judgement: 
psychiatric or psychological experts, magistrates concerned with 
the implementation of sentences, educationalists, members of the 
prison service, all fragment the legal power to punish; it might be 
objected that none of them really shares the right to judge; that some, 
after sentence is passed, have no other right than to implement the 
punishment laid down by the court and, above all, that others - the 
experts - intervene before the sentence not to pass judgement, but 
to assist the judges in their decision. But as soon as the penalties and 
the security measures defined by the court are not absolutely deter¬ 
mined, from the moment they may be modified along the way, 
from the moment one leaves to others than the judges of the offence 
the task of deciding whether the condemned man ‘deserves’ to be 
placed in semi-liberty or conditional liberty, whether they may 
bring his penal tutelage to an end, one is handing over to them 
mechanisms of legal punishment to be used at their discretion: 
subsidiary judges they may be, but they are judges all the same. 
The whole machinery that has been developing for years around 
the implementation of sentences, and their adjustment to individuals, 
creates a proliferation of the authorities of judicial decision-making 
and extends its powers of decision well beyond the sentence. The 
psychiatric experts, for their part, may well refrain from judging. 
Let us examine the three questions to which, since the 1958 ruling, 
they have to address themselves: Does the convicted person repre¬ 
sent a danger to society.^ Is he susceptible to penal punishment.^ Is he 
curable or readjustable.^ These questions have nothing to do with 
article 64, nor with the possible insanity of the convicted person at 
the moment of the act. They do not concern ‘responsibility’. They 
concern nothing but the administration of the penalty, its necessity, 
its usefulness, its possible effectiveness; they make it possible to 
show, in an almost transparent vocabulary, whether the mental hos¬ 
pital would be a more suitable place of confinement than the prison, 


21 




Torture 


whether this confinement should be short or long, whether medical 
treatment or security measures are called for. What, then, is the role 
of the psychiatrist in penal matters? He is not an expert in responsi¬ 
bility, but an adviser on punishment; it is up to him to say whether 
the subject is ‘dangerous’, in what way one should be protected 
from him, how one should intervene to alter him, whether it would 
be better to try to force him into submission or to treat him. At the 
very beginning of its history, psychiatric expertise was called upon 
to formulate ‘true’ propositions as to the part that the liberty of the 
offender had played in the act he had committed; it is now called 
upon to suggest a prescription for what might be called his ‘medico- 
judicial treatment’. 

To sum up, ever since the new penal system - that defined by the 
great codes of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries - has been in 
operation, a general process has led judges to judge something 
other than crimes; they have been led in their sentences to do some¬ 
thing other than judge; and the power of judging has been trans¬ 
ferred, in part, to other authorities than the judges of the offence. 
The whole penal operation has taken on extra-juridical elements and 
personnel. It will be said that there is nothing extraordinary in this, 
that it is part of the destiny of the law to absorb little by little 
elements that are alien to it. But what is odd about modern criminal 
justice is that, although it has taken on so many extra-juridical 
elements, it has done so not in order to be able to define them 
juridically and gradually to integrate them into the actual power to 
punish: on the contrary, it has done so in order to make them func¬ 
tion within the penal operation as non-juridical elements; in order 
to stop this operation being simply a legal punishment; in order to 
exculpate the judge from being purely and simply he who punishes, 
‘Of course, we pass sentence, but this sentence is not in direct 
relation to the crime. It is quite clear that for us it functions as a way 
of treating a criminal. We punish, but this is a way of saying that 
we wish to obtain a cure.’ Today, criminal justice functions and 
justifies itself only by this perpetual reference to something other 
than itself, by this unceasing reinscription in non-juridical systems. 
Its fate is to be redefined by knowledge. 

