been using and also make sure that their lamps are extinguished’; 
‘it is expressly forbidden to amuse companions by gestures or in any 
other way’; they must ‘comport themselves honestly and decently’; 
anyone who is absent for more than five minutes without warning 
M. Oppenheim will be ‘marked down for a half-day’; and in order 
to be sure that nothing is forgotten in this meticulous criminal 
justice, it is forbidden to do ‘anything that may harm M. Oppenheim 
and his companions’ (Oppenheim, 29 September 1809). The work¬ 
shop, the school, the army were subject to a whole micro-penality 
of time (latenesses, absences, interruptions of tasks), of activity 
(inattention, negligence, lack of zeal), of behaviour (impoliteness, 
disobedience), of speech (idle chatter, insolence), of the body 
(‘incorrect’ attitudes, irregular gestures, lack of cleanliness), of 
sexuality (impurity, indecency). At the same time, by way of punish¬ 
ment, a whole series of subtle procedures was used, from light 
physical punishment to minor deprivations and petty humiliations. 
It was a question both of making the slightest departures from cor¬ 
rect behaviour subject to punishment, and of giving a punitive 
function to the apparently indifferent elements of the disciplinary 
apparatus: so that, if necessary, everything might serve to punish 
the slightest thing; each subject find himself caught in a punishable, 
punishing universality. 'By the word punishment, one must under¬ 
stand everything that is capable of making children feel the offence 
they have committed, everything that is capable of humiliating them, 
of confusing them: ... a certain coldness, a certain indifference, a 
question, a humiliation, a removal from office’ (La Salle, Conduite 
■ ■ ; 204-5). 

2. But discipline brought with it a specific way of punishing that 
was not only a small-scale model of the court. What is specific to 
the disciplinary penality is non-observance, that which does not 
measure up to the rule, that departs from it. The whole indefinite 


178 




The means of correct training 


domain of the non-conforming is punishable: the soldier commits 
an ‘offence’ whenever he does not reach the level required; a pupil’s 
‘offence’ is not only a minor infraction, but also an inability to carry 
out his tasks. The regulations for the Prussian infantry ordered that 
a soldier who had not correctly learnt to handle his rifle should be 
treated with the ‘greatest severity’. Similarly, ‘when a pupil has not 
retained the catechism from the previous day, he must be forced to 
learn it, without making any mistake, and repeat it the following 
