Valaze, 344: perpetual imprisonment for those who have been judged 
‘irremediably wicked’. 

2 Masson, 139. Yet the objection made against penal labour was that it 
implied a recourse to violence (Le Peletier) or that it represented a 
profanation of the sacred character of work (Duport). Rabaud Saint- 
Etienne got the term ‘forced labour’ adopted in contra-distinction to 
‘free labour that belongs exclusively to free men’ (Archives Parlemen- 
taires, XXVI, yioff). 


312 



Notes 


3 Part of this code was translated in the introduction to the French 
translation of Colquhoun, 1807, 1 , 84. 

4 This explains the numerous prison regulations concerning the exac¬ 
tions of the warders, the security of the premises and the inability of 
prisoners to communicate among themselves. For example, the 
judgement of the Dijon Parlement of 21 September 1706. Cf. also 
Serpillon, 601-47. 

5 This is repeated exactly in the declaration of 4 March 1724 on recidivist 
thieves or that of 18 July 1724 concerning vagabondage. A boy, who 
was too young to go to the galleys, remained in a prison until he was 
old enough to be sent there, sometimes to serve the whole of his 
sentence. Cf. Crime et crimituditi en France sous I’Ancien Rigime, 266fF. 

6 Phalaris, tyrant of the Greek town of Agrigentum in Sicily, reigned 
about 560 B.c. He is said to have roasted men alive in a brazen bull. 
His name is used here to typify tyrants in general [Tr.]. 

7 Briey, ‘Tiers fitat’, quoted in Desjardin, 484. Cf. Goubert and Denis, 
263. One also finds in the cahiers demands for the maintenance of 
houses of detention that families might use. 

8 Cf. Thorsten Sellin, Pioneering in Penology, 1944, which gives an 
exhaustive study of the Rasphuis and the Spinhuis of Amsterdam. One 
may leave to one side another ‘model’, often cited in the eighteenth 
century. This is the one proposed by Mabillon in the Riflexions sur les 
prisons des ordres religieux, republished in 1845. It seems that this work 
was exhumed in the nineteenth century at a time when the Catholics 
were disputing with the Protestants the place they had taken up in the 
philanthropic movement and in certain administrative bodies. Mabil- 
lon’s work, which seems to have remained relatively unknown and 
uninfluential, sets out to show that ‘the first thought of the American 
penitentiary system’ is ‘a quite monastic and French thought, whatever 
one might say by way of giving it a Genevan or Pennsylvanian 
origin’ (L. Faucher). 

9 Vilan XIV, 64; this memoir, which is bound up with the foundation of 
the prison at Ghent, remained unpublished until 1841. The frequency 
of the penalty of banishment emphasized still further the relations 
between crime and vagabondage. In 1771, the States of Flanders 
remarked that ‘penalties of banishment imposed on beggars remained 
ineffectual, in view of the fact that the States send to one another 
subjects that they find pernicious at home. As a result, a beggar, 
chased in this way from place to place, will finally get himself hanged, 
whereas, if he had been given the habit of work, he would not have 
embarked on his evil path’ (Stoobant, 228). 


313 



Notes 


10 The Quakers certainly also knew the Rasphuis and Spinhuis of 
Amsterdam. Cf. Sellin, 109-10. In any case, Walnut Street Prison was 
a continuation of the Almshouse opened in 1767 and of the penal 
legislation that the Quakers had wished to impose despite the English 
administration. 

11 On the disorders caused by this law, cf. Rush, 5-9 and Vaux, 4;. It 
should be noted that in the report by J. L. Siegel, which had inspired 
the Rasphuis of Amsterdam, it was envisaged that penalties would not 
be proclaimed publicly, that prisoners would be brought into the 
prison at night, that warders would swear not to reveal their identity 
and that no visits would be permitted (Sellin, 27-8). 

12 B. Rush, who was one of the inspectors, notes after a visit to Walnut 
Street: ‘Moral cares: preaching, reading of good books, cleanliness of 
clothes and rooms, baths; one does not raise one’s voice, little wine, 
as little tobacco as possible, little obscene or profane conversation. 
Constant work: the gardens taken care of; it is beautiful: 1,200 head of 
cabbage’ (in Teeters, 1935, 50). 

13 Rush, 14. This idea of an apparatus for transforming human beings 
is already to be found in Hanway’s project for a ‘reformatory’: ‘The 
idea of a hospital and that of a malefactor are incompatible; but let us 
try to make the prison an authentic and effective reformatory, instead 
of it being like the others a school of vice’ (Hanway, 52). 

