



Discipline 


obligatory rhythm, imposed from the outside; it is a ‘programme’; 
it assures the elaboration of the act itself; it controls its development 
and its stages from the inside. We have passed from a form of 
injunction that measured or punctuated gestures to a web that con¬ 
strains them or sustains them throughout their entire succession. A 
sort of anatomo-chronological schema of behaviour is defined. The 
act is broken down into its elements; the position of the body, limbs, 
articulations is defined; to each movement are assigned a direction, 
an aptitude, a duration; their order of succession is prescribed. Time 
penetrates the body and with it all the meticulous controls of power. 

3. Hence the correlation of the body and the gesture. Disciplinary 
control does not consist simply in teaching or imposing a series of 
particular gestures; it imposes the best relation between a gesture 
and the overall position of the body, which is its condition of effi¬ 
ciency and speed. In the correct use of the body, which makes 
possible a correct use of time, nothing must remain idle or useless: 
everything must be called upon to form the support of the act 
required. A well-disciplined body forms the operational context of 
the slightest gesture. Good handwriting, for example, presupposes 
a gymnastics - a whole routine whose rigorous code invests the body 
in its entirety, from the points of the feet to the tip of the index 
finger. The pupils must always ‘hold their bodies erect, somewhat 
turned and free on the left side, slightly inclined, so that, with the 
elbow placed on the table, the chin can be rested upon the hand, 
unless this were to interfere with the view; the left leg must be some¬ 
what more forward under the table than the right. A distance of two 
fingers must be left between the body and the table; for not only 
does one write with more alertness, but nothing is more harmful 
to the health than to acquire the habit of pressing one’s stomach 
against the table; the part of the left arm from the elbow to the hand 
must be placed on the table. The right arm must be at a distance 
from the body of about three fingers and be about five fingers from 
the table, on which it must rest lightly. The teacher will place the 
pupils in the posture that they should maintain when writing, and 
will correct it either by sign or otherwise, when they change this 
position’ (La Salle, Conduite —, 63-4). A disciplined body is the 
prerequisite of an efficient gesture. 

4. The body-object articulation. Discipline defines each of the 


152 




Docile bodies 


relations that the body must have with the object that it manipulates. 
Between them, it outlines a meticulous meshing. ‘Bring the weapon 
forward. In three stages. Raise the rifle with the right hand, bringing 
it close to the body so as to hold it perpendicular with the right 
knee, the end of the barrel at eye level, grasping it by striking it with 
the right hand, the arm held close to the body at waist height. At the 
second stage, bring the rifle in front of you with the left hand, the 
barrel in the middle between the two eyes, vertical, the right hand 
grasping it at the small of the butt, the arm outstretched, the trigger- 
guard resting on the first finger, the left hand at the height of the 
notch, the thumb lying along the barrel against the moulding. At 
the third stage, let go of the rifle with the left hand, which falls along 
the thigh, raising the rifle with the right hand, the lock outwards 
and opposite the chest, the right arm half flexed, the elbow close to 
the body, the thumb lying against the lock, resting against the first 
screw, the hammer resting on the first finger, the barrel perpendicu¬ 
lar’ (‘Ordonnance du i®’' janvier 1766 ..., titreXI, article 2’). This 
is an example of what might be called the instrumental coding of the 
body. It consists of a breakdown of the total gesture into two parallel 
series: that of the parts of the body to be used (right hand, left hand, 
different fingers of the hand, knee, eye, elbow, etc.) and that of the 
parts of the object manipulated (barrel, notch, hammer, screw, etc.); 
then the two sets of parts are correlated together according to a 
number of simple gestures (rest, bend); lastly, it fixes the canonical 
succession in which each of these correlations occupies a particular 
place. This obligatory syntax is what the military theoreticians of 
the eighteenth century called 'manoeuvre'. The traditional recipe 
gives place to explicit and obligatory prescriptions. Over the whole 
surface of contact between the body and the object it handles, power 
is introduced, fastening them to one another. It constitutes a body- 
weapon, body-tool, body-machine complex. One is as far as possible 
from those forms of subjection that demanded of the body only 
signs or products, forms of expression or the result of labour. 
The regulation imposed by power is at the same time the law of 
construction of the operation. Thus disciplinary power appears to 
have the function not so much of deduction as of synthesis, not so 
much of exploitation of the product as of coercive link with the 
apparatus of production. 


153 


