extends and reinforces the effects of this power. On this reality- 
reference, various concepts have been constructed and domains of 
analysis carved out: psyche, subjectivity, personality, consciousness. 


29 




Torture 


etc.; on it have been built scientific techniques and discourses, 
and the moral claims of humanism. But let there be no misunder¬ 
standing: it is not that a real man, the object of knowledge, philo¬ 
sophical reflection or technical intervention, has been substituted 
for the soul, the illusion of the theologians. The man described for 
us, whom we are invited to free, is already in himself the effect of a 
subjection much more profound than himself. A ‘soul’ inhabits him 
and brings him to existence, which is itself a factor in the mastery 
that power exercises over the body. The soul is the effect and 
instrument of a political anatomy; the soul is the prison of the body. 

That punishment in general and the prison in particular belong 
to a political technology of the body is a lesson that I have learnt 
not so much from history as from the present. In recent years, 
prison revolts have occurred throughout the world. There was cer¬ 
tainly something paradoxical about their aims, their slogans and the 
way they took place. They were revolts against an entire state of 
physical misery that is over a century old: against cold, suffocation 
and overcrowding, against decrepit walls, hunger, physical mal¬ 
treatment. But they were also revolts against model prisons, tran¬ 
quillizers, isolation, the medical or educational services. Were they 
revolts whose aims were merely material.^ Or contradictory revolts: 
against the obsolete, but also against comfort; against the warders, 
but also against the psychiatrists.^ In fact, all these movements - and 
the innumerable discourses that the prison has given rise to since 
the early nineteenth century - have been about the body and 
material things. What has sustained these discourses, these mem¬ 
ories and invectives are indeed those minute material details. One 
may, if one is so disposed, see them as no more than blind demands 
or suspect the existence behind them of alien strategies. In fact, they 
were revolts, at the level of the body, against the very body of the 
prison. What was at issue was not whether the prison environment 
was too harsh or too aseptic, too primitive or too efficient, but its 
very materiality as an instrument and vector of power; it is this 
whole technology of power over the body that the technology of 
the ‘soul’ - that of the educationalists, psychologists and psychia¬ 
trists - fails either to conceal or to compensate, for the simple reason 
