show, in an almost transparent vocabulary, whether the mental hos¬ 
pital would be a more suitable place of confinement than the prison, 


21 




Torture 


whether this confinement should be short or long, whether medical 
treatment or security measures are called for. What, then, is the role 
of the psychiatrist in penal matters? He is not an expert in responsi¬ 
bility, but an adviser on punishment; it is up to him to say whether 
the subject is ‘dangerous’, in what way one should be protected 
from him, how one should intervene to alter him, whether it would 
be better to try to force him into submission or to treat him. At the 
very beginning of its history, psychiatric expertise was called upon 
to formulate ‘true’ propositions as to the part that the liberty of the 
offender had played in the act he had committed; it is now called 
upon to suggest a prescription for what might be called his ‘medico- 
judicial treatment’. 

To sum up, ever since the new penal system - that defined by the 
great codes of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries - has been in 
operation, a general process has led judges to judge something 
other than crimes; they have been led in their sentences to do some¬ 
thing other than judge; and the power of judging has been trans¬ 
ferred, in part, to other authorities than the judges of the offence. 
The whole penal operation has taken on extra-juridical elements and 
personnel. It will be said that there is nothing extraordinary in this, 
that it is part of the destiny of the law to absorb little by little 
elements that are alien to it. But what is odd about modern criminal 
justice is that, although it has taken on so many extra-juridical 
elements, it has done so not in order to be able to define them 
juridically and gradually to integrate them into the actual power to 
punish: on the contrary, it has done so in order to make them func¬ 
tion within the penal operation as non-juridical elements; in order 
to stop this operation being simply a legal punishment; in order to 
exculpate the judge from being purely and simply he who punishes, 
‘Of course, we pass sentence, but this sentence is not in direct 
relation to the crime. It is quite clear that for us it functions as a way 
of treating a criminal. We punish, but this is a way of saying that 
we wish to obtain a cure.’ Today, criminal justice functions and 
justifies itself only by this perpetual reference to something other 
than itself, by this unceasing reinscription in non-juridical systems. 
Its fate is to be redefined by knowledge. 

