
The means of correct training 


make it possible to see induce effects of power, and in which, 
conversely, the means of coercion make those on whom they are 
applied clearly visible. Slowly, in the course of the classical age, we 
see the construction of those ‘observatories’ of human multiplicity 
for which the history of the sciences has so little good to say. Side 
by side with the major technology of the telescope, the lens and the 
light beam, which were an integral part of the new physics and cos¬ 
mology, there were the minor techniques of multiple and intersect¬ 
ing observations, of eyes that must see without being seen; using 
techniques of subjection and methods of exploitation, an obscure 
art of light and the visible was secretly preparing a new knowledge 
of man. 

These ‘observatories’ had an almost ideal model: the military 
camp - the short-lived, artificial city, built and reshaped almost at 
will; the seat of a power that must be all the stronger, but also all 
the more discreet, all the more effective and on the alert in that it is 
exercised over armed men. In the perfect camp, all power would be 
exercised solely through exact observation; each gaze would form a 
part of the overall functioning of power. The old, traditional square 
plan was considerably refined in innumerable new projects. The 
geometry of the paths, the number and distribution of the tents, 
the orientation of their entrances, the disposition of files and ranks 
were exactly defined; the network of gazes that supervised one 
another was laid down: ‘In the parade ground, five lines are drawn 
up, the first is sixteen feet from the second; the others are eight feet 
from one another; and the last is eight feet from the arms depots. 
The arms depots are ten feet from the tents of the junior officers, 
immediately opposite the first tentpole. A company street is fifty-one 
feet wide. . . All tents are two feet from one another. The tents of 
the subalterns are opposite the alleys of their companies. The rear 
tentpole is eight feet from the last soldiers’ tent and the gate is 
opposite the captains’ tent. . . The captains’ tents are erected 
opposite the streets of their companies. The entrance is opposite the 
companies themselves.’* The camp is the diagram of a power that 
acts by means of general visibility. For a long time this model of the 
camp or at least its underlying principle was found in urban develop¬ 
ment, in the construction of working-class housing estates, hospitals, 
asylums, prisons, schools: the spatial ‘nesting’ of hierarchized 




Discipline 


surveillance. The principle was one of ‘embedding’ (^encastrement’). 
The camp was to the rather shameful art of surveillance what the 
dark room was to the great science of optics. 

A whole problematic then develops: that of an architecture that 
is no longer built simply to be seen (as with the ostentation of 
palaces), or to observe the external space (cf. the geometry of for¬ 
tresses), but to permit an internal, articulated and detailed control - 
to render visible those who are inside it; in more general terms, an 
architecture that would operate to transform individuals: to act on 
those it shelters, to provide a hold on their conduct, to carry the 
effects of power right to them, to make it possible to know them, to 
alter them. Stones can make people docile and knowable. The old 
simple schema of confinement and enclosure - thick walls, a heavy 
gate that prevents entering or leaving - began to be replaced by the 
calculation of openings, of filled and empty spaces, passages and 
transparencies. In this way the hospital building was gradually 
organized as an instrument of medical action: it was to allow a better 
observation of patients, and therefore a better calibration of their 
treatment; the form of the buildings, by the careful separation of the 
patients, was to prevent contagions; lastly, the ventilation and the 
air that circulated around each bed was to prevent the deleterious 
vapours from stagnating around the patient, breaking down his 
humours and spreading the disease by their immediate effects. The 
hospital - which was to be built in the second half of the century 
and for which so many plans were drawn up after the Hotel-Dieu 
was burnt down for the second time - was no longer simply the 
roof under which penury and imminent death took shelter; it was, 
in its very materiality, a therapeutic operator. 

Similarly, the school building was to be a mechanism for training. 
It was as a pedagogical machine that Paris-Duverney conceived the 
ficole Militaire, right down to the minute details that he had imposed 
on the architect, Gabriel. Train vigorous bodies, the imperative of 
health; obtain competent officers, the imperative of qualification; 
create obedient soldiers, the imperative of politics; prevent de¬ 
bauchery and homosexuality, the imperative of morality. A fourfold 
reason for establishing sealed compartments between individuals, 
but also apertures for continuous surveillance. The very building 
of the £cole was to be an apparatus for observation; the rooms were 


lyz 




The means of correct training 


