atrocity: it must bring it to light by confessions, statements, inscrip¬ 
tions that make it public; it must reproduce it in ceremonies that 
apply it to the body of the guilty person in the form of humiliation 
and pain. Atrocity is that part of the crime that the punishment 
turns back as torture in order to display it in the full light of day: 
it is a figure inherent in the mechanism that produces the visible 
truth of the crime at the very heart of the punishment itself. The 
public execution formed part of the procedure that established the 
reality of what one punished. Furthermore, the atrocity of a crime 
was also the violence of the challenge flung at the sovereign; it was 
that which would move him to make a reply whose function was to 
go further than this atrocity, to master it, to overcome it by an 
excess that annulled it. The atrocity that haunted the public execu¬ 
tion played, therefore, a double role: it was the principle of the 
communication between the crime and the punishment, it was also 
the exacerbation of the punishment in relation to the crime. It pro¬ 
vided the spectacle with both truth and power; it was the culmina¬ 
tion of the ritual of the investigation and the ceremony in which the 
sovereign triumphed. And it joined both together in the tortured 
body. The punitive practice of the nineteenth century was to strive 
to put as much distance as possible between the ‘serene’ search for 
truth and the violence that cannot be entirely effaced from punish¬ 
ment. It set out to mark the heterogeneity that separates the c“ime 
that is to be punished and the punishment imposed by the public 
power. Between truth and punishment, there should no longer be 
any other relation than one of legitimate consequence. The punish¬ 
ing power should not soil its hands with a crime greater than the 
one it wished to punish. It should remain innocent of the penalty 


5<5 



The spectacle of the scaffold 


that it inflicts. ‘Let us hasten to proscribe such tortures. They were 
worthy only of the crowned monsters who governed the Romans’ 
(Pastoret, on the subject of the punishment of regicides, II, 6i). But, 
according to the penal practice of the preceding period, the proxim¬ 
ity in the public execution of the sovereign and the crime, the mix¬ 
ture that was produced in it of ‘demonstration’ and punishment, 
were not the result of a barbarous confusion; what joined them 
together was the mechanism of atrocity and its necessary concatena¬ 
tions. The atrocity of the expiation organized the ritual destruction 
of infamy by omnipotence. 

The fact that the crime and the punishment were related and 
bound up in the form of atrocity was not the result of some ob¬ 
scurely accepted law of retaliation. It was the effect, in the rites of 
punishment, of a certain mechanism of power: of a power that not 
only did not hesitate to exert itself directly on bodies, but was 
exalted and strengthened by its visible manifestations; of a power 
that asserted itself as an armed power whose functions of maintain¬ 
ing order were not entirely unconnected with the functions of war; 
of a power that presented rules and obligations as personal bonds, a 
breach of which constituted an offence and called for vengeance; 
of a power for which disobedience was an act of hostility, the first 
sign of rebellion, which is not in principle different from civil war; 
of a power that had to demonstrate not why it enforced its laws, 
but who were its enemies, and what unleashing of force threatened 
them; of a power which, in the absence of continual supervision, 
sought a renewal of its effect in the spectacle of its individual mani¬ 
festations; of a power that was recharged in the ritual display of its 
reality as ‘super-power’. 

Of all the reasons why punishment that was not in the least 
ashamed of being ‘atrocious’ was replaced by punishment that was 
to claim the honour of being ‘humane’ there is one that must be 
analysed at once, for it is internal to the public execution itself: at 
once an element of its functioning and the principle of its perpetual 
disorder. 

In the ceremonies of the public execution, the main character was 
the people, whose real and immediate presence was required for the 
performance. An execution that was known to be taking place, but 


57 




Torture 


which did so in secret, would scarcely have had any meaning. The 
aim was to make an example, not only by making people aware that 
the slightest offence was likely to be punished, but by arousing 
feelings of terror by the spectacle of power letting its anger fall upon 
the guilty person: ‘In criminal matters, the most difficult point is 
the imposition of the penalty: it is the aim and the end of the 
procedure, and its only fruit, by example and terror, when it is well 
applied to the guilty person’ (Bruneau, unnumbered preface to the 
first part). 

But, in this scene of terror, the role of the people was an ambigu¬ 
ous one. People were summoned as spectators: they were assembled 
to observe public exhibitions and amendes honorables; pillories, 
