

Prison 


their suffering.’ Yet there was in those collective songs a totally new 
tonality; the moral code, which most of the old complaints obeyed, 
was reversed. Instead of bringing remorse, torture sharpened pride; 
the justice that brought the sentence was rejected, and the crowd 
that came to witness what it believed to be repentance or humiliation 
was scorned: ‘So far from our homes, we sometimes moan. Our 
stem brows will make our judges blench. . . Avid of misfortune 
you turn your eyes upon us, hoping to find a blighted, humiliated, 
tearful race. But there is pride in our eyes.’ One also finds the 
assertion that the convict’s life with its companionship has pleasures 
that liberty cannot know. ‘With time let us link oiir pleasures. Under 
lock and key feast days will be born. . . Pleasures are turncoats. 
They will flee the executioners; they follow where the song leads.’ 
And, above all, the present order will not last forever; not only will 
the convicts be freed and resume their rights, but their accusers will 
take their place. Between the criminals and their judges, the day of 
the great reverse judgement will come; ‘The contempt of men 
belongs to us convicts. The gold they worship is also ours. One day, 
this gold will pass into our hands. We will buy it with our lives. 
Others will seize these chains that today you make us bear; they will 
become slaves. As we break out of our shackles, the star of liberty 
will shine for us. . . Farewell, for we brave both your chains and 
your laws.’® The pious theatre imagined by the broadsheets, in 
which the convict exhorted the crowd never to imitate him, was 
becoming a threatening scene in which the crowd was asked to 
choose between the barbarity of the executioners, the injustice of the 
judges and the misfortune of convicts who, though defeated today, 
would triumph one day. 

The great spectacle of the chain-gang was linked with the old 
tradition of the public execution; it was also linked with that multiple 
representation of crime that gave rise at the time to newspapers, 
broadsheets, mountebanks and street theatres;’ but it was also linked 
with the confrontations and struggles whose first rumblings it con¬ 
veyed; it gave them a kind of symbolic outlet: though vanquished 
by the law, the army of disorder promised to return; what the 
violence of order had driven away would overthrow that order and 
bring liberty on its return. ‘I was horrified to see so many sparks 
reappear in those ashes’ {Le Dernier jour d’un condamne). The 


262 



