



Docile bodies 


relations that the body must have with the object that it manipulates. 
Between them, it outlines a meticulous meshing. ‘Bring the weapon 
forward. In three stages. Raise the rifle with the right hand, bringing 
it close to the body so as to hold it perpendicular with the right 
knee, the end of the barrel at eye level, grasping it by striking it with 
the right hand, the arm held close to the body at waist height. At the 
second stage, bring the rifle in front of you with the left hand, the 
barrel in the middle between the two eyes, vertical, the right hand 
grasping it at the small of the butt, the arm outstretched, the trigger- 
guard resting on the first finger, the left hand at the height of the 
notch, the thumb lying along the barrel against the moulding. At 
the third stage, let go of the rifle with the left hand, which falls along 
the thigh, raising the rifle with the right hand, the lock outwards 
and opposite the chest, the right arm half flexed, the elbow close to 
the body, the thumb lying against the lock, resting against the first 
screw, the hammer resting on the first finger, the barrel perpendicu¬ 
lar’ (‘Ordonnance du i®’' janvier 1766 ..., titreXI, article 2’). This 
is an example of what might be called the instrumental coding of the 
body. It consists of a breakdown of the total gesture into two parallel 
series: that of the parts of the body to be used (right hand, left hand, 
different fingers of the hand, knee, eye, elbow, etc.) and that of the 
parts of the object manipulated (barrel, notch, hammer, screw, etc.); 
then the two sets of parts are correlated together according to a 
number of simple gestures (rest, bend); lastly, it fixes the canonical 
succession in which each of these correlations occupies a particular 
place. This obligatory syntax is what the military theoreticians of 
the eighteenth century called 'manoeuvre'. The traditional recipe 
gives place to explicit and obligatory prescriptions. Over the whole 
surface of contact between the body and the object it handles, power 
is introduced, fastening them to one another. It constitutes a body- 
weapon, body-tool, body-machine complex. One is as far as possible 
from those forms of subjection that demanded of the body only 
signs or products, forms of expression or the result of labour. 
The regulation imposed by power is at the same time the law of 
construction of the operation. Thus disciplinary power appears to 
have the function not so much of deduction as of synthesis, not so 
much of exploitation of the product as of coercive link with the 
apparatus of production. 


153 


