necessary with the multitude, treat them with severity or contempt; 
hence these workers either cost more or leave the factory soon after 
arrival’ {Encyclopidie, article on ‘Manufacture’). But, although the 
workers preferred a framework of a guild type to this new regime 
of surveillance, the employers saw that it was indissociable from the 
system of industrial production, private property and profit. At the 
scale of a factory, a great iron-works or a mine, ‘the objects of 
expenditure are so multiplied, that the slightest dishonesty on each 
object would add up to an immense fraud, which would not only 
absorb the profits, but would lead to a loss of capital... the slightest 
incompetence, if left unnoticed and therefore repeated each day, may 
prove fatal to the enterprise to the extent of destroying it in a very 
short time’; hence the fact that only agents, directly dependent on 
the owner, and entrusted with this task alone would be able to see 
‘that not a sou is spent uselessly, that not a moment of the day is 
lost’; their role would be ‘to supervise the workers, to inspect all the 
places of work, to inform the directors of everything that takes 
place’ (Cournol). Surveillance thus becomes a decisive economic 
operator both as an internal part of the production machinery and 
as a specific mechanism in the disciplinary power. ‘The work of 
directing, superintending and adjusting becomes one of the functions 
of capital, from the moment that the labour under the control of 
capital, becomes cooperative. Once a function of capital, it requires 
special characteristics’ (Marx, Capital, vol. i, 313). 

The same movement was to be found in the reorganization of 
elementary teaching: the details of surveillance were specified and 
it was integrated into the teaching relationship. The development 
of the parish schools, the increase in the number of their pupils, the 
absence of methods for regulating simultaneously the activity of a 
whole class, and the disorder and confusion that followed from this 
made it necessary to work out a system of supervision. In order to 
help the teacher, Batencour selected from among the best pupils a 
whole series of ‘officers’ - intendants, observers, monitors, tutors, 
reciters of prayers, writing officers, receivers of ink, almoners and 
visitors. The roles thus defined were of two kinds: the first involved 
material tasks (distributing ink and paper, giving alms to the poor. 


175 



Discipline 


reading spiritual texts on feast days, etc.); the second involved sur¬ 
veillance: the ‘observers must record who left his bench, who was 
talking, who did not have his rosary, or Book of Hours, who did not 
comport himself properly at mass, who committed an impure act, 
who indulged in idle talk or was unruly in the street’; the ‘admoni- 
tors’ were placed in charge of those ‘who talk or hum when studying 
their lessons and those who will not write and who waste their time 
in play’; the ‘visitors’ called on the families of pupils who had been 
absent or who had committed serious oifences. The ‘intendants’ 
supervised all the other officers. Only the ‘tutors’ had a pedagogical 
role: their task was to teach the pupils reading, two by two, in low 
tones (M.I.D.B., 68-83). ^ decades later, Demia favoured a 
hierarchy of the same type but almost all the functions of surveillance 
were duplicated by a pedagogical role: an assistant teacher taught the 
holding of the pen, guided the pupil’s hand, corrected mistakes and 
at the same time ‘marked down trouble-makers’; another assistant 
teacher had the same tasks in the reading class; the intendant who 
supervised the other officers and was in charge of behaviour in 
general also had the task of ‘initiating newcomers into the customs 
of the school’; the decurions got the pupils to recite their lessons and 
‘marked down’ those who did not know them.® We have here a 
sketch of an institution of the ‘mutual’ type in which three proce¬ 
dures are integrated into a single mechanism: teaching proper, the 
acquisition of knowledge by the very practice of the pedagogical 
activity and a reciprocal, hierarchized observation. A relation of 
surveillance, defined and regulated, is inscribed at the heart of the 
practice of teaching, not as an additional or adjacent part, but as a 
mechanism that is inherent to it and which increases its efficiency. 

Hierarchized, continuous and functional surveillance may not be 
one of the great technical ‘inventions’ of the eighteenth century, but 
its insidious extension owed its importance to the mechanisms of 
power that it brought with it. By means of such surveillance, dis¬ 
ciplinary power became an ‘integrated’ system, linked from the 
inside to the economy and to the aims of the mechanism in which it 
was practised. It was also organized as a multiple, automatic and 
anonymous power; for although surveillance rests on individuals, 
its functioning is that of a network of relations from top to bottom, 
but also to a certain extent from bottom to top and laterally; this 


176 



The means of correct training 


network ‘holds’ the whole together and traverses it in its entirety 
with effects of power that derive from one another: supervisors, 
perpetually supervised. The power in the hierarchized surveillance 
of the disciplines is not possessed as a thing, or transferred as a 
property; it functions like a piece of machinery. And, although it is 
true that its pyramidal organization gives it a ‘head’, it is the appara¬ 
