obeys, responds, becomes skilful and increases its forces. The great 
book of Man-the-Machine was written simultaneously on two 
registers: the anatomico-metaphysical register, of which Descartes 
wrote the first pages and which the physicians and philosophers 
continued, and the technico-political register, which was constituted 
by a whole set of regulations and by empirical and calculated 
methods relating to the army, the school and the hospital, for con¬ 
trolling or correcting the operations of the body. These two regis¬ 
ters are quite distinct, since it was a question, on the one hand, of 
submission and use and, on the other, of functioning and explana¬ 
tion: there was a useful body and an intelligible body. And yet there 
are points of overlap from one to the other. La Mettrie’s L'Homme- 
machine is both a materialist reduction of the soul and a general 
theory of dressage, at the centre of which reigns the notion of 
‘docility’, which joins the analysable body to the manipulable body. 
A body is docile that may be subjected, used, transformed and 
improved. The celebrated automata, on the other hand, were not 
only a way of illustrating an organism, they were also political 
puppets, small-scale models of power: Frederick II, the meticulous 
king of small machines, well-trained regiments and long exercises, 
was obsessed with them. 

What was so new in these projects of docility that interested the 
eighteenth century so much.^ It was certainly not the first time that 
the body had become the object of such imperious and pressing 
investments; in every society, the body was in the grip of very 
strict powers, which imposed on it constraints, prohibitions or 
obligations. However, there were several new things in these tech¬ 
niques. To begin with, there was the scale of the control: it was a 


136 



Docile bodies 


question not of treating the body, en masse, ‘wholesale’, as if it were 
an indissociable unity, but of working it ‘retail’, individually; of 
exercising upon it a subtle coercion, of obtaining holds upon it at the 
level of the mechanism itself - movements, gestures, attitudes, 
rapidity: an infinitesimal power over the active body. Then there 
was the object of the control: it was not or was no longer the signify¬ 
ing elements of behaviour or the language of the body, but the 
economy, the efficiency of movements, their internal organization; 
constraint bears upon the forces rather than upon the signs; the only 
truly important ceremony is that of exercise. Lastly, there is the 
modality: it implies an uninterrupted, constant coercion, super¬ 
vising the processes of the activity rather than its result and it is 
