that serve as references for different phases and positions of the 
exercise. In the background is a piece of classical architecture. The 
columns of the palace extend those formed by the ranks of men and 
the erect rifles, just as the paving no doubt extends the lines of the 
exercise. But above the balustrade that crowns the building are 
statues representing dancing figures: sinuous lines, rounded ges¬ 
tures, draperies. The marble is covered with movements whose 
principle of unity is harmonic. The men, on the other hand, are 
frozen into a uniformly repeated attitude of ranks and lines: a 
tactical unity. The order of the architecture, which frees at its sum¬ 
mit the figures of the dance, imposes its rules and its geometry on the 
disciplined men on the ground. The columns of power. ‘Very good’. 
Grand Duke Mikhail once remarked of a regiment, after having 
kept it for one hour presenting arms, ‘only they breathe' (Kropotkin, 
8; I owe this reference to G. Canguilhem). 




The means of correct training 


Let us take this medal as evidence of the moment when, para¬ 
doxically but significantly, the most brilliant figure of sovereign 
power is joined to the emergence of the rituals proper to disciplinary 
power. The scarcely sustainable visibility of the monarch is turned 
into the unavoidable visibility of the subjects. And it is this inversion 
of visibility in the functioning of the disciplines that was to assure the 
exercise of power even in its lowest manifestations. We are entering 
the age of the infinite examination and of compulsory objectification. 

2. The examination also introduces individuality into the field of 
documentation. The examination leaves behind it a whole meticulous 
archive constituted in terms of bodies and days. The examination 
that places individuals in a field of surveillance also situates them in 
a network of writing; it engages them in a whole mass of documents 
that capture and fix them. The procedures of examination were 
accompanied at the same time by a system of intense registration 
and of documentary accumulation. A ‘power of writing’ was con¬ 
stituted as an essential part in the mechanisms of discipline. On many 
points, it was modelled on the traditional methods of administrative 
documentation, though with particular techniques and important 
innovations. Some concerned methods of identification, signalling 
or description. This was the problem in the army, where it was 
necessary to track down deserters, avoid repeating enrolments, 
correct fictitious ‘information’ presented by officers, know the ser¬ 
vices and value of each individual, establish with certainty 
the balance-sheet of those who had disappeared or died. It was the 
problem of the hospitals, where it was necessary to recognize 
the patients, expel shammers, follow the evolution of diseases, study 
