fectly legible way over the whole series of individual bodies, the 
work force may be analysed in individual units. At the emergence 
of large-scale industry, one finds, beneath the division of the pro¬ 
duction process, the individualizing fragmentation of labour power; 
the distributions of the disciplinary space often assured both. 

4. In discipline, the elements are interchangeable, since each is 
defined by the place it occupies in a series, and by the gap that 
separates it from the others. The unit is, therefore, neither the 
territory (unit of domination), nor the place (unit of residence), but 
the ran^; the place one occupies in a classification, the point at which 
a line and a column intersect, the interval in a series of intervals that 



Discipline 


one may traverse one after the other. Discipline is an art of rank, 
a technique for the transformation of arrangements. It individualizes 
bodies by a location that does not give them a fixed position, but 
distributes them and circulates them in a network of relations. 

Take the example of the ‘class’. In the Jesuit colleges, one still 
found an organization that was at once binary and unified; the 
classes, which might comprise up to two or three hundred pupils, 
were subdivided into groups of ten; each of these groups, with its 
‘decurion’, was placed in a camp, Roman or Carthaginian; each 
‘decury’ had its counterpart in the opposing camp. The general 
form was that of war and rivalry; work, apprenticeship and classifi¬ 
cation were carried out in the form of the joust, through the con¬ 
frontation of two armies; the contribution of each pupil was in¬ 
scribed in this general duel; it contributed to the victory or the 
defeat of a whole camp; and the pupils were assigned a place that 
corresponded to the function of each individual and to his value as 
a combatant in the unitary group of his ‘decury’ (Rochemonteix, 
5 iff). It should be observed moreover that this Roman comedy 
made it possible to link, to the binary exercises of rivalry, a spatial 
disposition inspired by the legion, with rank, hierarchy, pyramidal 
supervision. One should not forget that, generally speaking, the 
Roman model, at the Enlightenment, played a dual role: in its 
republican aspect, it was the very embodiment of liberty; in its 
military aspect, it was the ideal schema of discipline. The Rome of 
the eighteenth century and of the Revolution was the Rome of the 
Senate, but it was also that of the legion; it was the Rome of the 
Forum, but it was also that of the camps. Up to the empire, the 
Roman reference transmitted, somewhat ambiguously, the juridical 
ideal of citizenship and the technique of disciplinary methods. In 
any case, the strictly disciplinary element in the ancient fable used by 
the Jesuit colleges came to dominate the element of joust and mock 
warfare. Gradually - but especially after 1762 - the educational 
space unfolds; the class becomes homogeneous, it is no longer made 
up of individual elements arranged side by side under the master’s 
eye. In the eighteenth century, ‘rank’ begins to define the great form 
of distribution of individuals in the educational order: rows or ranks 
of pupils in the class, corridors, courtyards; rank attributed to each 
pupil at the end of each task and each examination; the rank he 



Docile bodies 


obtains from week to week, month to month, year to year; an 
alignment of age groups, one after another; a succession of subjects 
taught and questions treated, according to an order of increasing 
difficulty. And, in this ensemble of compulsory alignments, each 
pupil, according to his age, his performance, his behaviour, occupies 
sometimes one rank, sometimes another; he moves constantly over 
a series of compartments - some of these are ‘ideal’ compartments, 
marking a hierarchy of knowledge or ability, others express the 
distribution of values or merits in material terms in the space of the 
college or classroom. It is a perpetual movement in which individuals 
replace one another in a space marked off by aligned intervals. 

The organization of a serial space was one of the great technical 
mutations of elementary education. It made it possible to supersede 
the traditional system (a pupil working for a few minutes with the 
master, while the rest of the heterogeneous group remained idle and 
unattended). By assigning individual places it made possible the 
supervision of each individual and the simultaneous work of all. It 
organized a new economy of the time of apprenticeship. It made the 
educational space function like a learning machine, but also as a 
machine for supervising, hierarchizing, rewarding. Jean-Baptiste de 
La Salle dreamt of a classroom in which the spatial distribution 
might provide a whole series of distinctions at once: according to 
the pupils’ progress, worth, character, application, cleanliness and 
parents’ fortune. Thus, the classroom would form a single great 
table, with many different entries, under the scrupulously ‘classi- 
ficatory’ eye of the master: ‘In every class there will be places 
assigned for all the pupils of all the lessons, so that all those attending 
the same lesson will always occupy the same place. Pupils attending 
the highest lessons will be placed in the benches closest to the wall, 
followed by the others according to the order of the lessons moving 
towards the middle of the classroom. . . Each of the pupils will 
have his place assigned to him and none of them will leave it or 
change it except on the order or with the consent of the school 
inspector.’ Things must be so arranged that ‘those whose parents 
are neglectful and verminous must be separated from those who are 
careful and clean; that an unruly and frivolous pupil should be 
