social category with an interest in order judges another that is 
dedicated to disorder: ‘Visit the places where people are judged, 
imprisoned or executed. . . One thing will strike you everywhere; 
everywhere you see two quite distinct classes of men, one of which 
always meets on the seats of the accusers and judges, the other on 
the benches of the accused’, which is explained by the fact that the 
latter, for lack of resources and education, do not know ‘how to 
remain within the limits of legal probity’ (Lucas, II, 82); so that the 
language of the law, which is supposed to be universal, is, in this 
respect, inadequate; it must, if it is to be effective, be the discourse 
of one class to another, which has neither the same ideas as it nor 
even the same words: ‘How are we, with our prudish, contemptuous 
languages, overloaded with formality, to make ourselves uhderstood 
by those who have never heard anything but the crude, poor, 
irregular, but lively, frank, picturesque dialect of the market, the 
tavern and the fair. .. What language, what method should we use 
when drawing up laws that will act effectively on the uneducated 
minds of those less capable of resisting the temptations of crime.^’ 
(Rossi, I, 33). Law and justice do not hesitate to proclaim their 
necessary class dissymmetry. 

If this is the case, the prison, apparently ‘failing’, does not miss 
its target; on the contrary, it reaches it, in so far as it gives rise to 
one particular form of illegality in the midst of others, which it is 
able to isolate, to place in full light and to organize as a relatively 
enclosed, but penetrable, milieu. It helps to establish an open illegal- 


276 




Illegalities and delinquency 


ity, irreducible at a certain level and secretly useful, at once refrac¬ 
tory and docile; it isolates, outlines, brings out a form of illegality 
that seems to sum up symbolically all the others, but which makes it 
possible to leave in the shade those that one wishes to - or must - 
tolerate. This form is, strictly speaking, delinquency. One should 
not see in delinquency the most intense, most harmful form of 
illegality, the form that the penal apparatus must try to eliminate 
through imprisonment because of the danger it represents; it is 
rather an effect of penality (and of the penality of detention) that 
makes it possible to differentiate, accommodate and supervise 
illegalities. No doubt delinquency is a form of illegality; certainly 
it has its roots in illegality; but it is an illegality that the ‘carceral 
system’, with all its ramifications, has invested, segmented, isolated, 
penetrated, organized, enclosed in a definite milieu, and to which it 
