other, the bourgeoisie was to reserve to itself the illegality of rights: 
the possibility of getting round its own regulations and its own laws, 
of ensuring for itself an immense sector of economic circulation by 
a skilful manipulation of gaps in the law - gaps that were foreseen 
by its silences, or opened up by de facto tolerance. And this great 
redistribution of illegalities was even to be expressed through a 
specialization of the legal circuits: for illegalities of property - for 
theft - there were the ordinary courts and punishments; for the 
illegalities of rights - fraud, tax evasion, irregular commercial 
operations - special legal institutions applied with transactions, 
accommodations, reduced fines, etc. The bourgeoisie reserved to 
itself the fruitful domain of the illegality of rights. And at the same 
time as this split was taking place, there emerged the need for 
a constant policing concerned essentially with this illegality of 
property. It became necessary to get rid of the old economy of the 
power to punish, based on the principles of the confused and in¬ 
adequate multiplicity of authorities, the distribution and concentra¬ 
tion of the power correlative with actual inertia and inevitable 
tolerance, punishments that were spectacular in their manifestations 
and haphazard in their application. It became necessary to define a 
strategy and techniques of punishment in which an economy of 
continuity and permanence would replace that of expenditure and 
excess. In short, penal reform was born at the point of junction 
between the struggle against the super-power of the sovereign and 
that against the infra-power of acquired and tolerated illegalities. 
And if penal reform was anything more than the temporary result 
of a purely circumstantial encounter, it was because, between this 


87 




Punishment 


super-power and this infra-power, a whole network of relations 
was being formed. By placing on the side of the sovereign the 
additional burden of a spectacular, unlimited, personal, irregular 
and discontinuous power, the form of monarchical sovereignty left 
the subjects free to practise a constant illegality; this illegality was 
like the correlative of this type of power. So much so that in attack¬ 
ing the various prerogatives of the sovereign one was also attacking 
the functioning of the illegalities. The two objectives were in con¬ 
tinuity. And, according to particular circumstances or tactics, the 
reformers laid more stress on one or the other. Le Trosne, the 
physiocrat who was a judge at the presidial court of Orleans, may 
serve as an example. In 1764, he published a memorandum on vaga¬ 
bondage: that hot-bed of thieves and murderers ‘who live in the 
