exercised according to a codification that partitions as closely as 
possible time, space, movement. These methods, which made 
possible the meticulous control of the operations of the body, 
which assured the constant subjection of its forces and imposed 
upon them a relation of docility-utility, might be called ‘disciplines’. 
Many disciplinary methods had long been in existence - in monas¬ 
teries, armies, workshops. But in the course of the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries the disciplines became general formulas of 
domination. They were different from slavery because they were 
not based on a relation of appropriation of bodies; indeed, the 
elegance of the discipline lay in the fact that it could dispense with 
this costly and violent relation by obtaining effects of utility at least 
as great. They were different, too, from ‘service’, which was a 
constant, total, massive, non-analytical, unlimited relation of 
domination, established in the form of the individual will of the 
master, his ‘caprice’. They were different from vassalage, which was 
a highly coded, but distant relation of submission, which bore less 
on the operations of the body than on the products of labour and 
the ritual marks of allegiance. Again, they were different from 
asceticism and from ‘disciplines’ of a monastic type, whose function 
was to obtain renunciations rather than increases of utility and 
which, although they involved obedience to others, had as their 
principal aim an increase of the mastery of each individual over his 
own body. The historical moment of the disciplines was the moment 
when an art of the human body was born, which was directed not 
only at the growth of its skills, nor at the intensification of its 


137 



Discipline 


subjection, but at the formation of a relation that in the mechanism 
itself makes it more obedient as it becomes more useful, and con¬ 
versely. What was then being formed was a policy of coercions 
that act upon the body, a calculated manipulation of its elements, 
its gestures, its behaviour. The human body was entering a machin¬ 
ery of power that explores it, breaks it down and rearranges it. A 
‘political anatomy’, which was also a ‘mechanics of power’, was 
being born; it defined how one may have a hold over others’ bodies, 
not only so that they may do what one wishes, but so that they may 
operate as one wishes, with the techniques, the speed and the effi¬ 
ciency that one determines. Thus discipline produces subjected and 
practised bodies, ‘docile’ bodies. Discipline increases the forces of 
the body (in economic terms of utility) and diminishes these same 
forces (in political terms of obedience). In short, it dissociates power 
from the body; on the one hand, it turns it into an ‘aptitude’, a 
‘capacity’, which it seeks to increase; on the other hand, it reverses 
the course of the energy, the power that might result from it, and 
turns it into a relation of strict subjection. If economic exploit¬ 
ation separates the force and the product of labour, let us say 
that disciplinary coercion establishes in the body the con¬ 
stricting link between an increased aptitude and an increased 
domination. 

The ‘invention’ of this new political anatomy must not be seen 
as a sudden discovery. It is rather a multiplicity of often minor 
processes, of different origin and scattered location, which overlap, 
repeat, or imitate one another, support one another, distinguish 
themselves from one another according to their domain of applica¬ 
tion, converge and gradually produce the blueprint of a general 
method. They were at work in secondary education at a very early 
date, later in primary schools; they slowly invested the space of the 
hospital; and, in a few decades, they restructured the military 
organization. They sometimes circulated very rapidly from one 
point to another (between the army and the technical schools or 
secondary schools), sometimes slowly and discreetly (the insidious 
militarization of the large workshops). On almost every occasion, 
they were adopted in response to particular needs: an industrial 
innovation, a renewed outbreak of certain epidemic diseases, the 
invention of the rifle or the victories of Prussia. This did not prevent 


138 



Docile bodies 


them being totally inscribed in general and essential transforma¬ 
tions, which we must now try to delineate. 

There can be no question here of writing the history of the 
different disciplinary institutions, with all their individual differ¬ 
ences. I simply intend to map on a series of examples some of the 
essential techniques that most easily spread from one to another. 
These were always meticulous, often minute, techniques, but they 
had their importance: because they defined a certain mode of 
detailed political investment of the body, a ‘new micro-physics’ of 
power; and because, since the seventeenth century, they had con¬ 
stantly reached out to ever broader domains, as if they tended to 
cover the entire social body. Small acts of cunning endowed with a 
great power of diffusion, subtle arrangements, apparently innocent, 
but profoundly suspicious, mechanisms that obeyed economies too 
shameful to be acknowledged, or pursued petty forms of coercion - 
it was nevertheless they that brought about the mutation of the 
