by reason of its extent and mechanisms, with a society of the 
disciplinary type. Yet it would be wrong to believe that the dis¬ 
ciplinary functions were confiscated and absorbed once and for all 
by a state apparatus. 

‘Discipline’ may be identified neither with an institution nor with 
an apparatus; it is a type of power, a modality for its exercise, com¬ 
prising a whole set of instruments, techniques, procedures, levels of 
application, targets; it is a ‘physics’ or an ‘anatomy’ of power, a 
technology. And it may be taken over either by ‘specialized’ institu¬ 
tions (the penitentiaries or ‘houses of correction’ of the nineteenth 
centiuy), or by institutions that use it as an essential instrument for a 
particular end (schools, hospitals), or by pre-existing authorities 
that find in it a means of reinforcing or reorganizing their internal 
mechanisms of power (one day we should show how intra-familial 
relations, essentially in the parents-children cell, have become ‘disci¬ 
plined’, absorbing since the classical age external schemata, first 




Discipline 


educational and military, then medical, psychiatric, psychological, 
which have made the family the privileged locus of emergence for 
the disciplinary question of the normal and the abnormal); or by 
apparatuses that have made discipline their principle of internal 
functioning (the disciplinarization of the administrative apparatus 
from the Napoleonic period), or finally by state apparatuses whose 
major, if not exclusive, function is to assure that discipline reigns 
over society as a whole (the police). 

On the whole, therefore, one can speak of the formation of a 
disciplinary society in this movement that stretches from the 
enclosed disciplines, a sort of social ‘quarantine’, to an indefinitely 
generalizable mechanism of ‘panopticism’. Not because the disci¬ 
plinary modality of power has replaced all the others; but because 
it has infiltrated the others, sometimes undermining them, but 
serving as an intermediary between them, linking them together, 
extending them and above all making it possible to bring the effects 
of power to the most minute and distant elements. It assures an 
infinitesimal distribution of the power relations. 

A few years after Bentham, Julius gave this society its birth 
certificate (Julius, 384-6). Speaking of the panoptic principle, he 
said that there was much more there than architectural ingenuity: 
it was an event in the ‘history of the human mind’. In appearance, 
it is merely the solution of a technical problem; but, through it, a 
whole type of society emerges. Antiquity had been a civilization of 
