toire of melodrama’ {Pauvre Jacques, ist year, no. 3). The counter¬ 
man divers systematically stresses the facts of delinquency in the 
bourgeoisie, showing that it is the class affected by ‘physical degen¬ 
eration’ and ‘moral decay’; for the accounts of crimes committed 
by ordinary people it substitutes descriptions of the misery into 
which their exploiters plunge them and who, literally, starve and 
murder them;*’ it points out in the criminal trials of workers what 
share of responsibility must be attributed to the employers and to 
society as a whole. In short, a whole effort was being made to 
reverse this monotonous discourse on crime, which sought both to 


288 



Illegalities and delinquency 


isolate it as a monstrosity and to depict it as the work of the poorest 
class. 

In the course of this anti-penal polemic, the Fourierists no doubt 
went further than any of the others. They were perhaps the first to 
elaborate a political theory which, at the same time, places a positive 
value on crime. Although, in their view, crime is a result of ‘civiliza¬ 
tion’, it is also, and by that very fact, a weapon against it. It bears 
within it a figure and a future. ‘The social order dominated by 
the fatality of its repressive principle continues to kill through the 
executioner or through the prisons those whose natural robustness 
rejects or disdains its prescriptions, those who, too strong to remain 
enclosed within its tight swaddling-clothes, break from them and 
tear them to pieces, men who do not wish to remain children’ (Za 
Phalange, lo January 1837). There is not, therefore, a criminal 
nature, but a play of forces which, according to the class to which 
individuals belong,*® will lead them to power or to prison: if bom 
poor, today’s magistrates would no doubt be in the convict-ships; 
and the convicts, if they had been well born, ‘would be presiding 
in the courts and dispensing justice’ {La Phalange, 1 December 
1838). At bottom, the existence of crime manifests ‘a fortunate 
irrepressibility of human nature’; it should be seen not so much as 
a weakness or a disease, as an energy that is reviving, an ‘outburst 
of protest in the name of human individuality’, which no doubt 
accounts for its strange power of fascination. ‘Without crime, which 
awakens in us a mass of torpid feelings and half distinguished 
passions, we would remain still longer in disorder, in weakness’ 
{La Phalange, 10 January 1837). It may be, therefore, that crime 
constitutes a political instrument that could prove as precious for 
the liberation of our society as it has been for the emancipation of 
the Negroes; indeed, will such an emancipation take place without 
