tury) and lastly that of crime in high society (Arsene Lupin). The 
combination of the fait divers and the detective novel has produced 
for the last hundred years or more an enormous mass of ‘crime 
stories’ in which delinquency appears both as very close and quite 
alien, a perpetual threat to everyday life, but extremely distant in its 
origin and motives, both everyday and exotic in the milieu in which 
it takes place. Through the importance attributed to it and the 
surfeit of discourse surrounding it, a line is traced round it which, 
while exalting it, sets it apart. In such a formidable delinquency, 
coming from so alien a clime, what illegality could recognize itself.^... 

This multiple tactic had its effect: this is proved by the campaign 
of the workers’ newspapers against penal labour;** against the ‘com- 


286 



Illegalities and delinquency 


fort of the prisons’ and for giving prisoners the hardest and most 
dangerous work; against the excessive interest shown by philan¬ 
thropists in the delinquents; against the literature that exalts crime;®* 
it is also proved by the general mistrust felt throughout the workers’ 
movement for former common-law convicts. ‘At the dawn of the 
twentieth century,’ writes Mich^e Perrot, ‘surrounded by contempt, 
the highest of walls, the prison finally closed in on an unpopular 
people’ (Perrot). 

Yet it certainly cannot be said that this tactic triumphed or that 
it brought about a total break between the delinquents and the lower 
classes. The relations between the poorer classes and illegality, the 
reciprocal position of the proletariat and the urban plebs has yet to 
be studied. But one thing is certain: delinquency and repression 
were regarded, in the workers’ movements of the years 1830-50, 
as an important issue. There was no doubt hostility towards the 
delinquents; but it was a battle around penality. The workers’ news¬ 
papers often proposed a political analysis of criminality that con¬ 
tradicted term by term the description familiar to the philanthropists 
(poverty - dissipation - laziness - drunkenness - vice - theft - 
crime). They assigned the origin of delinquency not to the indivi¬ 
dual criminal (he was merely the occasion or the first victim), but 
to society: ‘The man who kills you is not free not to kill you. It is 
society or, to be more precise, bad social organization that is 
responsible’ {UHumanitaire, August 1841). This is so either because 
society is incapable of providing its fundamental needs, or because 
it destroys or effaces in him possibilities, aspirations or needs that 
later emerge in crime: ‘Bad education, unused aptitudes and forces, 
