corresponding to the windows of the tower; the other, on the out¬ 
side, allows the light to cross the cell from one end to the other. 
All that is needed, then, is to place a supervisor in a central tower 
and to shut up in each cell a madman, a patient, a condemned man, 
a worker or a schoolboy. By the effect of backlighting, one can 
observe from the tower, standing out precisely against the light, 
the small captive shadows in the cells of the periphery. They are 
like so many cages, so many small theatres, in which each actor is 
alone, perfectly individualized and constantly visible. The panoptic 
mechanism arranges spatial unities that make it possible to see con¬ 
stantly and to recognize immediately. In short, it reverses the prin¬ 
ciple of the dungeon; or rather of its three functions - to enclose, to 
deprive of light and to hide - it preserves only the first and elimin¬ 
ates the other two. Full lighting and the eye of a supervisor capture 
better than darkness, which ultimately protected. Visibility is a trap. 

To begin with, this made it possible - as a negative effect - to 
avoid those compact, swarming, howling masses that were to be 
found in places of confinement, those painted by Goya or described 
by Howard. Each individual, in his place, is securely confined to a 
cell from which he is seen from the front by the supervisor; but the 
side walls prevent him from coming into contact with his compan¬ 
ions. He is seen, but he does not see; he is the object of information, 
never a subject in communication. The arrangement of his room, 
opposite the central tower, imposes on him an axial visibility; but 
the divisions of the ring, those separated cells, imply a lateral 
invisibility. And this invisibility is a guarantee of order. If the in¬ 
mates are convicts, there is no danger of a plot, an attempt at 
collective escape, the planning of new crimes for the future, bad 
reciprocal influences; if they are patients, there is no danger of 


200 



Panoptidsm 

contagion; if they are madmen theie is no risk of their committing 
violence upon one another; if they are schoolchildren, there is no 
copying, no noise, no chatter, no waste of time; if they are workers, 
there are no disorders, no theft, no coalitions, none of those dis¬ 
tractions that slow down the rate of work, make it less perfect or 
cause accidents. The crowd, a compact mass, a locus of multiple 
exchanges, individualities merging together, a collective effect, is 
abolished and replaced by a collection of separated individualities. 
From the point of view of the guardian, it is replaced by a multipli¬ 
city that can be numbered and supervised; from the point of view of 
the inmates, by a sequestered and observed solitude (Bentham, 
60-64). 

Hence the major effect of the Panopticon: to induce in the inmate 
a state of conscious and permanent visibility that assures the auto¬ 
matic functioning of power. So to arrange things that the surveil¬ 
lance is permanent in its effects, even if it is discontinuous in its 
action; that the perfection of power should tend to render its actual 
exercise unnecessary; that this architectural apparatus should be a 
machine for creating and sustaining a power relation independent 
of the person who exercises it; in short, that the inmates should be 
caught up in a power situation of which they are themselves the 
bearers. To achieve this, it is at once too much and too little that the 
prisoner should be constantly observed by an inspector: too little, 
for what matters is that he knows himself to be observed; too much, 
because he has no need in fact of being so. In view of this, Bentham 
laid down the principle that power should be visible and unveri- 
fiable. Visible: the inmate will constantly have before his eyes the 
tall outline of the central tower from which he is spied upon. 
Unverifiable: the inmate must never know whether he is being 
looked at at any one moment; but he must be sure that he may always 
be so. In order to make the presence or absence of the inspector 
unverifiable, so that the prisoners, in their cells, cannot even see a 
shadow, Bentham envisaged not only Venetian blinds on the 
windows of the central observation hall, but, on the inside, partitions 
that intersected the hall at right angles and, in order to pass from 
one quarter to the other, not doors but zig-zag openings; for the 
slightest noise, a gleam of light, a brightness in a half-opened door 
would betray the presence of the guardian.^ The Panopticon is a 


201 




Discipline 


machine for dissociating the see/being seen dyad: in the periph¬ 
eric ring, one is totally seen, without ever seeing; in the central 
tower, one sees everything without ever being seen.® 

It is an important mechanism, for it automatizes and disindivi- 
dualizes power. Power has its principle not so much in a person as 
in a certain concerted distribution of bodies, surfaces, lights, gazes; 
in an arrangement whose internal mechanisms produce the relation 
in which individuals are caught up. The ceremonies, the rituals, the 
marks by which the sovereign’s surplus power was manifested are 
useless. There is a machinery that assures dissymmetry, disequili¬ 
brium, difference. Consequently, it does not matter who exercises 
power. Any individual, taken almost at random, can operate the 
