isolation provides a ‘terrible shock’ which, while protecting the 
prisoner from bad influences, enables him to go into himself and 
rediscover in the depths of his conscience the voice of good; solitary 
work would then become not only an apprenticeship, but also an exer¬ 
cise in spiritual conversion; it would rearrange not only the complex 


122 




The gentle way in punishment 


of interests proper to homo oeconotmcus, but also the imperatives of 
the moral subject. The cell, that technique of Christian monachism, 
which had survived only in Catholic countries, becomes in this 
protestant society the instrument by which one may reconstitute 
both homo oeconomicus and the religious conscience. Between the 
crime and the return to right and virtue, the prison would constitute 
the ‘space between two worlds’ the place for the individual transfor¬ 
mation that would restore to the state the subject it had lost. Hanway 
called this apparams for modifying individuals a ‘reformatory’ (cf. 
Hanway). These were the general principles that Howard and 
Blackstone put into operation in 1779 when the independence of the 
United States put an end to deportation and when a law was being 
drawn up to modify the system of penalties. Imprisonment, with the 
purpose of transforming the soul and conduct, made its entry into 
the system of civil laws. The preamble of the bill, written by Black- 
stone and Howard, describes individual imprisonment in terms of 
its triple function as example to be feared, instrument of conversion 
and condition for an apprenticeship: subjected ‘to isolated detention, 
regular work and the influence of religious instruction’, certain 
criminals might not only inspire terror in those who would be 
tempted to imitate them, ‘but also to correct themselves and to 
acquire the habit of work’ (Preamble of the bill of 1779). Hence the 
decision to build two penitentiaries, one for men, one for women, 
in which the isolated prisoners would be put ‘to the most servile 
labours, most compatible with the ignorance, negligence and 
obstinacy of the criminals’: walking in a wheel to move a machine, 
fixing a winch, polishing marble, beating hemp, rasping logwood, 
cutting up rags, rope-making and sewing sacks. In fact, only one 
penitentiary was built, at Gloucester, and it corresponded only 
partially to the initial plan: total confinement for the most dangerous 
criminals; for the others, day work in common and separation at 
night. 

Then came the Philadelphia model. This was no doubt the most 
famous because it was associated in people’s minds with the political 
