justice did little more than deploy its magnificent theatre, the ritual 
praise of its force, on a corpse. The condemned man was blind¬ 
folded and tied to a stake; all around, on the scaffold, were stakes 
with iron hooks. ‘The confessor whispered in the patient’s ear and, 
after he had given him the blessing, the executioner, who had an 
iron bludgeon of the kind used in slaughter houses, delivered a blow 
with all his might on the temple of the wretch, who fell dead: the 
mortis exactor, who had a large knife, then cut his throat, which 
spattered him with blood; it was a horrible sight to see; he severed 
the sinews near the two heels, and then opened up the belly from 
which he drew the heart, liver, spleen and lungs, which he stuck on 
an iron hook, and cut and dissected into pieces, which he then stuck 
on the other hooks as he cut them, as one does with an animal. 
Look who can at such a sight’ (Bruneau, 259). In the explicit 
reference to the butcher’s trade, the infinitesimal destruction of the 
body is linked here with spectacle: each piece is placed on display. 

The execution was accompanied by a whole ceremonial of 
triumph; but it also included, as a dramatic nucleus in its monotonous 
progress, a scene of confrontation: this was the immediate, direct 
action of the executioner on the body of the ‘patient’. It was a coded 
action, of course, since custom and, often quite explicitly, the sen¬ 
tence prescribed its principal episodes. Nevertheless, it did preserve 
something of the battle. The executioner not only implemented the 
law, he also deployed the force; he was the agent of a violence applied, 
in order to master it, to the violence of the crime. Materially, physic¬ 
ally, he was the adversary of this crime: an adversary who could show 
pity or ruthlessness. Damhoud^re complained, with many of his 
contemporaries, that the executioners exercised ‘every cruelty with 
regard to the evil-doing patients, treating them, buffeting and killing 
them as if they had a beast in their hands’ (Damhoud^re, 219). And 
fora long time the habit did not die out.® There was still an element 
of challenge and of jousting in the ceremony of public execution. 
If the executioner triumphed, if he managed to cut off the head with 
a single blow, he ‘showed it to the people, put it down on the ground 
and then waved to the public who greatly applauded his skill by 


51 




Torture 


clapping’. (A scene observed by T. S. Gueulette, at the execution of 
Montigny in 1737 - cf. Anchel, <>2-9.) Conversely, if he failed, if he 
did not succeed in killing the ‘patient’ as required, he was liable to 
punishment. This was the case of Damiens’s executioner who, being 
