individuality; and it is also the individual who has to be trained or 
corrected, classified, normalized, excluded, etc. 

For a long time ordinary individuality - the everyday individual¬ 
ity of everybody - remained below the threshold of description. 

To be looked at, observed, described in detail, followed from day 
to day by an uninterrupted writing was a privilege. The chronicle of 
a man, the account of his life, his historiography, written as he lived 
out his life formed part of the rituals of his power. The disciplinary 
methods reversed this relation, lowered the threshold of describable 
individuality and made of this description a means of control and a 
method of domination. It is no longer a monument for future 
memory, but a document for possible use. And this new describ- 
ability is all the more marked in that the disciplinary framework is 


191 



Discipline 


a strict one: the child, the patient, the madman, the prisoner, were 
to become, with increasing ease from the eighteenth century and 
according to a curve which is that of the mechanisms of discipline, 
the object of individual descriptions and biographical accounts. 
This turning of real lives into writing is no longer a procedure of 
heroization; it functions as a procedure of objectification and sub¬ 
jection. The carefully collated life of mental patients or delinquents 
belongs, as did the chronicle of kings or the adventures of the great 
popular bandits, to a certain political function of writing; but in a 
quite different technique of power. 

The examination as the fixing, at once ritual and ‘scientific’, of 
individual differences, as the pinning down of each individual in his 
own particularity (in contrast with the ceremony in which status, 
birth, privilege, function are manifested with all the spectacle of 
their marks) clearly indicates the appearance of a new modality of 
power in which each individual receives as his status his own indivi¬ 
duality, and in which he is linked by his status to the features, the 
measurements, the gaps, the ‘marks’ that characterize him and make 
him a ‘case’. 

Finally, the examination is at the centre of the procedures that 
constitute the individual as effect and object of power, as effect and 
object of knowledge. It is the examination which, by combining 
hierarchical surveillance and normalizing judgement, assures the 
great disciplinary functions of distribution and classification, maxi¬ 
mum extraction of forces and time, continuous genetic accumula¬ 
tion, optimum combination of aptitudes and, thereby, the fabrication 
of cellular, organic, genetic and combinatory individuality. With it 
are ritualized those disciplines that may be characterized in a word 
by saying that they are a modality of power for which individual 
difference is relevant. 

The disciplines mark the moment when the reversal of the political 
axis of individualization - as one might call it - takes place. In 
certain societies, of which the feudal regime is only one example, 
it may be said that individualization is greatest where sovereignty 
is exercised and in the higher echelons of power. The more one 
possesses power or privilege, the more one is marked as an indivi¬ 
dual, by rituals, written accounts or visual reproductions. The ‘name’ 


192 



The means of correct training 


and the genealogy that situate one within a kinship group, the 
performance of deeds that demonstrate superior strength and which 
are immortalized in literary accounts, the ceremonies that mark the 
power relations in their very ordering, the monuments or donations 
that bring survival after death, the ostentation and excess of expendi¬ 
ture, the multiple, intersecting links of allegiance and suzerainty, 
all these are procedures of an ‘ascending’ individualization. In a 
disciplinary regime, on the other hand, individualization is ‘descend¬ 
ing’: as power becomes more anonymous and more functional, 
those on whom it is exercised tend to be more strongly individual¬ 
ized; it is exercised by surveillance rather than ceremonies, by obser¬ 
vation rather than commemorative accounts, by comparative 
measures that have the ‘norm’ as reference rather than genealogies 
giving ancestors as points of reference; by ‘gaps’ rather than by 
deeds. In a system of discipline, the child is more individualized 
than the adult, the patient more than the healthy man, the madman 
and the delinquent more than the normal and the non-delinquent. 
In each case, it is towards the first of these pairs that all the indivi¬ 
dualizing mechanisms are turned in our civilization; and when one 
wishes to individualize the healthy, normal and law-abiding adult, 
it is always by asking him how much of the child he has in him, 
what secret madness lies within him, what fundamental crime he 
has dreamt of committing. All the sciences, analyses or practices 
employing the root ‘psycho-’ have their origin in this historical 
reversal of the procedures of individualization. The moment that 
saw the transition from historico-ritual mechanisms for the forma¬ 
tion of individuality to the scientifico-disciplinary mechanisms, 
