must control them. A multiplicity, whether in a workshop or a 
nation, an army or a school, reaches the threshold of a discipline 
when the relation of the one to the other becomes favourable. 

If the economic take-off of the West began with the techniques 
that made possible the accumulation of capital, it might perhaps be 
said that the methods for administering the accumulation of men 


220 




Panopticism 


made possible a political take-ofF in relation to the traditional, ritual, 
costly, violent forms of power, which soon fell into disuse and were 
superseded by a subtle, calculated technology of subjection. In fact, 
the two processes - the accumulation of men and the accumulation 
of capital - cannot be separated; it would not have been possible 
to solve the problem of the accumulation of men without the growth 
of an apparatus of production capable of both sustaining them and 
using them; conversely, the techniques that made the cumulative 
multiplicity of men useful accelerated the accumulation of capital. 
At a less general level, the technological mutations of the apparatus 
of production, the division of labour and the elaboration of the 
disciplinary techniques sustained an ensemble of very close relations 
(cf. Marx, Capital, vol. i, chapter XIII and the very interesting 
analysis in Guerry and Deleule). Each makes the other possible and 
necessary; each provides a model for the other. The disciplinary 
pyramid constituted the small cell of power within which the 
separation, coordination and supervision of tasks was imposed and 
made efficient; and analytical partitioning of time, gestures and 
bodily forces constituted an operational schema that could easily be 
transferred from the groups to be subjected to the mechanisms of 
production; the massive projection of military methods onto indus¬ 
trial organization was an example of this modelling of the division 
of labour following the model laid down by the schemata of power. 
But, on the other hand, the technical analysis of the process of 
production, its ‘mechanical’ breaking-down, were projected onto 
the labour force whose task it was to implement it: the constitution 
of those disciplinary machines in which the individual forces that 
they bring together are composed into a whole and therefore 
increased is the effect of this projection. Let us say that discipline 
is the unitary technique by which the body is reduced as a ‘political’ 
force at the least cost and maximized as a useful force. The growth 
of a capitalist economy gave rise to the specific modality of disci¬ 
plinary power, whose general formulas, techniques of submitting 
forces and bodies, in short, ‘political anatomy’, could be operated 
in the most diverse political regimes, apparatuses or institutions. 

2. The panoptic modality of power - at the elementary, tech¬ 
nical, merely physical level at which it is situated - is not under 
the immediate dependence or a direct extension of the great 


221 




Discipline 


juridico-political structures of a society; it is nonetheless not 
absolutely independent. Historically, the process by which the 
bourgeoisie became in the course of the eighteenth century the politi¬ 
cally dominant class was masked by the establishment of an explicit, 
coded and formally egalitarian juridical framework, made possible 
by the organization of a parliamentary, representative regime. But 
the development and generalization of disciplinary mechanisms 
constituted the other, dark side of these processes. The general 
juridical form that guaranteed a system of rights that were egali¬ 
tarian in principle was supported by these tiny, everyday, physical 
mechanisms, by all those systems of micro-power that are essentially 
non-egalitarian and asymmetrical that we call the disciplines. And 
although, in a formal way, the representative regime makes it pos¬ 
sible, directly or indirectly, with or without relays, for the will of 
all to form the fundamental authority of sovereignty, the disciplines 
provide, at the base, a guarantee of the submission of forces and 
bodies. The real, corporal disciplines constituted the foundation of 
the formal, juridical liberties. The contract may have been regarded 
as the ideal foundation of law and political power; panopticism 
constituted the technique, universally widespread, of coercion. 
It continued to work in depth on the juridical structures of society, 
in order to make the effective mechanisms of power function in 
opposition to the formal framework that it had acquired. The 
‘Enlightenment’, which discovered the liberties, also invented the 
disciplines. 

In appearance, the disciplines constitute nothing more than an 
infra-law. They seem to extend the general forms defined by law to 
the infinitesimal level of individual lives; or they appear as methods 
of training that enable individuals to become integrated into these 
general demands. They seem to constitute the same type of law on 
a different scale, thereby making it more meticulous and more 
indulgent. The disciplines should be regarded as a sort of counter¬ 
law. They have the precise role of introducing insuperable asym¬ 
