go off to work, which must begin at six in summer and seven in 
winter. 

Art. 21. Meal. At ten o’clock the prisoners leave their work and 
go to the refectoryj they wash their hands in their courtyards and 
assemble in divisions. After the dinner, there is recreation until 
twenty minutes to eleven. 

Art. 22. School. At twenty minutes to eleven, at the drum-roll, 
the prisoners form into ranks, and proceed in divisions to the 
school. The class lasts two hours and consists alternately of reading, 
writing, drawing and arithmetic. 

Art. 23. At twenty minutes to one, the prisoners leave the 
school, in divisions, and return to their courtyards for recreation. 
At five minutes to one, at the drum-roll, they form into work- 
teams. 

Art. 24. At one o’clock they must be back in the workshops: they 
work until four o’clock. 


6 




The body of the condemned 


Art. 25. At four o’clock the prisoners leave their workshops and 
go into the courtyards where they wash their hands and form into 
divisions for the refectory. 

Art. 26. Supper and the recreation that follows it last until five 
o’clock: the prisoners then return to the workshops. 

Art. 27. At seven o’clock in the summer, at eight in winter, 
work stops; bread is distributed for the last time in the workshops. 
For a quarter of an hour one of the prisoners or supervisors reads a 
passage from some instructive or uplifting work. This is followed 
by evening prayer. 

Art. 28. At half-past seven in summer, half-past eight in winter, 
the prisoners must be back in their cells after the washing of hands 
and the inspection of clothes in the courtyard; at the first drum-roll, 
they must undress, and at the second get into bed. The cell doors 
are closed and the supervisors go the rounds in the corridors, to 
ensure order and silence’ (Faucher, 274-82). 

We have, then, a public execution and a time-table. They do not 
punish the same crimes or the same type of delinquent. But they 
each define a certain penal style. Less than a century separates them. 
It was a time when, in Europe and in the United States, the entire 
economy of punishment was redistributed. It was a time of great 
‘scandals’ for traditional justice, a time of innumerable projects for 
reform. It saw a new theory of law and crime, a new moral or politi¬ 
cal justification of the right to punish; old laws were abolished, old 
customs died out. ‘Modern’ codes were planned or drawn up: 
Russia, 1769; Prussia, 1780; Pennsylvania and Tuscany, 1786; 
Austria, 1788; France, 1791, Year IV, 1808 and 1810. It was a new 
age for penal justice. 

Among so many changes, I shall consider one: the disappearance 
of torture as a public spectacle. Today we are rather inclined to ig¬ 
nore it; perhaps, in its time, it gave rise to too much inflated rhetoric; 
perhaps it has been attributed too readily and too emphatically to a 
process of ‘humanization’, thus dispensing with the need for further 
analysis. And, in any case, how important is such a change, when 
compared with the great institutional transformations, the formula¬ 
tion of explicit, general codes and unified rules of procedure; with 
the almost universal adoption of the jury system, the definition of 


7 



Torture 


the essentially corrective character of the penalty and the tendency, 
which has become increasingly marked since the nineteenth century, 
to adapt punishment to the individual offender? Punishment of a 
less immediately physical kind, a certain discretion in the art of 
inflicting pain, a combination of more subtle, more subdued suffer¬ 
ings, deprived of their visible display, should not all this be treated 
as a special case, an incidental effect of deeper changes? And yet the 
fact remains that a few decades saw the disappearance of the tor¬ 
tured, dismembered, amputated body, symbolically branded on face 
or shoulder, exposed alive or dead to public view. The body as the 
major target of penal repression disappeared. 

By the end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth 
cenmry, the gloomy festival of punishment was dying out, though 
here and there it flickered momentarily into life. In this transforma¬ 
tion, two processes were at work. They did not have quite the same 
chronology or the same raison d'etre. The first was the disappearance 
of punishment as a spectacle. The ceremonial of punishment tended 
to decline; it survived only as a new legal or administrative practice. 
