justice almost up to the Revolution had even increased in certain 
respects the rigour of the old edicts; Pussort, who, among the com¬ 
missioners entrusted with the task of drawing up the documents, 
represented the intentions of the king, was responsible for this, 
despite the views of such magistrates as Lamoignon; the number of 
uprisings at the very height of the classical age, the rumbling close 
at hand of civil war, the king’s desire to assert his power at the 
expense of the parlements go a long way to explain the survival of 
so severe a penal system. 

In accounting for a penal system involving so much torture, these 
are general and in a sense external reasons; they explain not only 
the possibility and the long survival of physical punishments, but 
also the weakness and the rather sporadic nature of the opposition 
to them. Against this general background we must bring out their 
precise function. If torture was so strongly embedded in legal 
practice, it was because it revealed truth and showed the operation 
of power. It assured the articulation of the written on the oral, the 
secret on the public, the procedure of investigation on the operation 
of the confession; it made it possible to reproduce the crime on the 
visible body of the criminal; in the same horror, the crime had to 
be manifested and annulled. It also made the body of the condemned 
man the place where the vengeance of the sovereign was applied, 
the anchoring point for a manifestation of power, an opportunity 
of affirming the dissymmetry of forces. We shall see later that the 
truth-power relation remains at the heart of all mechanisms of 
punishment and that it is still to be found in contemporary penal 
practice - but in a quite different form and with very different effects. 
The Enlightenment was soon to condemn public torture and execu¬ 
tion as an ‘atrocity’ - a term that was often used to describe it, but 
without any critical intention, by jurists themselves. Perhaps the 


55 



Torture 


notion of ‘atrocity’ is one of those that best designates the economy 
of the public execution in the old penal practice. To begin with, 
atrocity is a characteristic of some of the great crimes: it refers to the 
number of natural or positive, divine or human laws that they 
attack, to the scandalous openness or, on the contrary, to the secret 
cunning with which they have been committed, to the rank and 
status of those who are their authors and victims, to the disorder 
that they presuppose or bring with them, to the horror they 
arouse. In so far as it must bring the crime before everyone’s eyes, 
in all its severity, the punishment must take responsibility for this 
