appearance in the domain of science and above all in that of legisla¬ 
tion is quite recent’ (‘Congres penitentiaire de Bruxelles’, 1847). 
And the Amor commission, of May 1945, faithfully repeats: ‘The 
penalty that deprives of liberty has as its essential aim the reforma¬ 
tion and social rehabilitation of the convict.’ The principle of 
correction. 

2. Convicts must be isolated or at least distributed according to 
the penal gravity of their act, but above all according to age, mental 
attitude, the technique of correction to be used, the stages of their 
transformation. ‘One must take into account, in using methods for 
altering the great physical and moral differences to be found in the 
characters of convicts, their degree of perversity, the unequal 
opportunities for correction that they may offer’ (February, 1850). 
1945: ‘The distribution in the penitentiary establishments of indivi¬ 
duals serving a light sentence of up to one year is based on sex, 
personality and the degree of perversion of the delinquent.’ The prin¬ 
ciple of classification. 

3. It must be possible to alter the penalties according to the 
individuality of the convicts, the results that have been obtained, 
progress or relapses. ‘Since the principal aim of the penalty is the 
reform of the convict, it is desirable that any convict whose moral 
regeneration is sufficiently assured should be set free’ (Lucas, 1838), 
1945: ‘A progressive regime is applied ... with a view to adapting 
the treatment of the prisoner to his attitude and to his degree of 
improvement. This regime stretches from solitary confinement to 
semi-liberty. . . The benefit of parole is extended to all penalties 
involving a term of imprisonment.’ The principle of the modulation 
ofpenalties. 

4. Work must be one of the essential elements in the transforma¬ 
tion and progressive socialization of convicts. Penal labour ‘must 
not be regarded as the complement and as it were an aggravation 
of the penalty, but as a mitigation, of which it is no longer possible 


269 



Prison 


to deprive the prisoner’. It must enable him to learn or to practise a 
trade, and to provide the prisoner and his family with a source of 
income (Ducpetiaux, 1857). 1945: ‘Every common-law prisoner is 
obliged to work. . . No prisoner may be forced to remain unoccu¬ 
pied.’ The principle of work as obligation and right. 

5. The education of the prisoner is for the authorities both an 
indispensable precaution in the interests of society and an obligation 
to the prisoner. ‘Education alone may serve as a penitentiary 
instrument. The question of penitentiary imprisonment is a question 
of education’ (Lucas, 1838). 1945: ‘The treatment meted out to the 
prisoner, outside any corrupting promiscuity ... must be directed 
principally to his general and professional instruction and to his 
improvement.’ The principle of penitentiary education. 

6. The prison regime must, at least in part, be supervised and 
administered by a specialized staff possessing the moral qualities and 
technical abilities required of educators. In 1850, on the subject of 
prison medicine, Ferrus remarked: ‘It is a useful addition to all 
forms of imprisonment ... no one could possess more intimately 
than a physician the trust of the prisoners, know their characters 
better, influence their mental attitudes more effectively, while reliev¬ 
ing their physical ills and, by this means, reprimand or encourage 
as he thinks fit.’ 1945: ‘In every penitentiary establishment, there 
functions a social and medico-psychological service.’ The principle 
of the technical supervision of detention. 

7. Imprisonment must be followed by measures of supervision and 
assistance until the rehabilitation of the former prisoner is complete. 
Not only must he be placed under surveillance on leaving prison, 
‘but he must be given help and support’ (Boulet and Benquot at the 
Chambre de Paris). 1945: ‘Assistance is given to prisoners during 
and after imprisonment with a view to facilitating their rehabilita¬ 
tion.’ The principle of auxiliary institutions. 

Word for word, from one century to the other, the same funda¬ 
mental propositions are repeated. They reappear in each new, hard- 
won, finally accepted formulation of a reform that has hitherto 
always been lacking. The same sentences or almost the same could 
have been borrowed from other ‘fruitful’ periods of reform: the end 
of the nineteenth century and the ‘movement of social defence’; or 
again, the last few years, with the prisoners’ revolts. 


270 



Illegalities and delinquency 


One must not, therefore, regard the prison, its ‘failure’ and its 
more or less successful reform as three successive stages. One 
should think rather of a simultaneous system that historically has 
been superimposed on the juridical deprivation of liberty; a fourfold 
system comprising; the additional, disciplinary element of the prison 
