taining summaries of these registers, the use in about 1833, according 
to the method of ‘naturalists, librarians, merchants, businessmen’ of 
a system of individual cards or reports, which facilitated the integra¬ 
tion of new data and, at the same time, together with the name of the 
individual under investigation, all the information that might con¬ 
cern him (Bonneville, 1844,92-3) - the appearance of the card-index 
and the constitution of the human sciences are another invention 
that historians have taken little note of). Delinquency, with the 
secret agents that it procures, but also with the generalized policing 
that it authorizes, constitutes a means of perpetual surveillance of 
the population: an apparatus that makes it possible to supervise, 
through the delinquents themselves, the whole social field. Delin¬ 
quency functions as a political observatory. In their turn, the statis¬ 
ticians and the sociologists have made use of it, long after the police. 

But this surveillance has been able to function only in conjunction 
with the prison. Because the prison facilitates the supervision of 
individuals when they are released, because it makes possible the 
recruiting of informers and multiplies mutual denunciations, because 
it brings offenders into contact with one another, it precipitates the 
organization of a delinquent milieu, closed in upon itself, but easily 
supervised: and all the results of non-rehabilitation (unemployment. 


281 




Prison 


prohibitions on residence, enforced residences, probation) make it 
all too easy for former prisoners to carry out the tasks assigned 
to them. Prison and police form a twin mechanism; together they 
assure in the whole field of illegalities the differentiation, isolation 
and use of delinquency. In the illegalities, the police-prison system 
segments a manipulable delinquency. This delinquency, with its 
specificity, is a result of the system; but it also becomes a part and 
an instrument of it. So that one should speak of an ensemble whose 
three terms (police-prison-delinquency) support one another and 
form a circuit that is never interrupted. Police surveillance provides 
the prison with offenders, which the prison transforms into delin¬ 
quents, the targets and auxiliaries of police supervisions, which 
regularly send back a certain number of them to prison. 

There is no penal justice intended to prosecute ail illegal practices 
which, to do so, would use the police as an auxiliary and prison as a 
punitive instrument, and not leave in its wake the unassimilable 
residue of ‘delinquency’. One should regard this justice as an instru¬ 
ment for the differential supervision of illegalities. In relation to this 
instrument, criminal justice plays the role of legal surety and prin¬ 
ciple of transmission. It is a relay in a general economy of illegalities, 
whose other elements are (not below it, but beside it) the police, the 
prison and delinquency. Police encroachment on justice and the 
force of inertia that the carceral institution opposes to justice are not 
new, nor are they the result of a sclerosis or of a gradual shift in 
power; it is a structural feature that characterizes punitive mechan¬ 
isms in modern societies. The magistrates can say what they like; 
penal justice, with all its theatrical apparatus, is intended to respond 
to the daily demand of an apparatus of supervision half submerged 
in the darkness in which police and delinquency are brought to¬ 
gether. Judges are the scarcely resisting employees of this appara- 
tus.i® They assist as far as they can in the constitution of delinquency, 
that is to say, in the differentiation of illegalities, in the supervision, 
colonization and use of certain of these illegalities by the illegality 
of the dominant class. 

Two figures stand out as representative of this process, which 
developed in the first thirty or forty years of the nineteenth century. 
First, there was Vidocq (cf. his Memoires and Histoire de Vidocq 
racontee par lid-meme). He was a man of the old illegalities, a Gil 


282 




Illegalities and delinquency 


Bias of the other end of the century, who soon took a turn for the 
worse: disturbances, adventures, swindlings, of which he was 
usually himself the victim, brawls and duels; successive enlistments 
and desertions, contacts with prostitution, gambling, pickpocketing 
and soon large-scale brigandage. But the almost mythical importance 
that he assumed in the eyes of his contemporaries was based not on 
this, perhaps embellished past; it was not even based on the fact that, 
for the first time in history, a former inmate of a convict-ship, 
redeemed or quite simply bought, became a chief of police, but 
rather on the fact that, in him, delinquency visibly assumed its 
ambiguous status as an object and instrument for a police apparatus 
that worked both against it and with it. Vidocq marks the moment 
when deliquency, detached from other illegalities, was invested by 
power and turned inside out. It was then that the direct, institutional 
coupling of police and delinquency took place: the disturbing 
moment when criminality became one of the mechanisms of power. 
A figure had haunted earlier times, that of the monstrous king, the 
source of all justice and yet besmirched with crime; another fear 
