69 




PART TWO 
Punishment 






I. Generalized punishment 


‘Let penalties be regulated and proportioned to the offences, let the 
death sentence be passed only on those convicted of murder, and 
let the tortures that revolt humanity be abolished.’ Thus, in 1789, 
the chancellery summed up the general position of the petitions 
addressed to the authorities concerning tortures and executions (cf. 
Seligman, and Desjardin, 13-20). Protests against the public execu¬ 
tions proliferated in the second half of the eighteenth century: among 
the philosophers and theoreticians of the law; among lawyers and 
parlementaires; in popular petitions and among the legislators of the 
assemblies. Another form of punishment was needed; the physical 
confrontation between the sovereign and the condemned man must 
end; this hand-to-hand fight between the vengeance of the prince and 
the contained anger of the people, through the mediation of the victim 
and the executioner, must be concluded. Very soon the public execu¬ 
tion became intolerable. On the side of power, where it betrayed 
tyranny, excess, the thirst for revenge, and ‘the cruel pleasure taken 
in punishing’ (Petion de Villeneuve, 641), it was revolting. On the 
side of the victim who, though reduced to despair, was still expected 
to bless ‘heaven and its judges who appeared to have abandoned 
him’ (Boucher d’Argis, 1781, 125), it was shameful. It was, in any 
case, dangerous, in that it provided a support for a confrontation 
between the violence of the king and the violence of the people. It 
was as if the sovereign power did not see, in this emulation of 
atrocity, a challenge that it itself threw down and which might one 
day be taken up: accustomed as it was to ‘seeing blood flow’, the 
people soon learnt that ‘it could be revenged only with blood’ 
(Lachere). In these ceremonies, which were the object of so much 
adverse investment, one sees the intersection of the excess of armed 
justice and the anger of the threatened people. Joseph de Maistre 


73 


