But the body is also directly involved in a political field; power 
relations have an immediate hold upon it; they invest it, mark it, 
train it, torture it, force it to carry out tasks, to perform ceremonies, 
to emit signs. This political investment of the body is bound up, 
in accordance with complex reciprocal relations, with its economic 


25 




Torture 


use; it is largely as a force of production that the body is invested 
with relations of power and domination; but, on the other hand, its 
constitution as labour power is possible only if it is caught up in a 
system of subjection (in which need is also a political instrument 
meticulously prepared, calculated and used); the body becomes a 
useful force only if it is both a productive body and a subjected body. 
This subjection is not only obtained by the instruments of violence 
or ideology; it can also be direct, physical, pitting force against 
force, bearing on material elements, and yet without involving 
violence; it may be calculated, organized, technically thought out; 
it may be subtle, make use neither of weapons nor of terror and yet 
remain of a physical order. That is to say, there may be a ‘knowledge’ 
of the body that is not exactly the science of its functioning, and a 
mastery of its forces that is more than the ability to conquer them: 
this knowledge and this mastery constitute what might be called the 
political technology of the body. Of course, this technology is 
diffuse, rarely formulated in continuous, systematic discourse; it is 
often made up of bits and pieces; it implements a disparate set of 
tools or methods. In spite of the coherence of its results, it is 
generally no more than a multiform instrumentarion. Moreover, it 
cannot be localized in a particular type of institution or state 
apparatus. For they have recourse to it; they use, select or impose 
certain of its methods. But, in its mechanisms and its effects, it is 
situated at a quite different level. What the apparatuses and institu¬ 
tions operate is, in a sense, a micro-physics of power, whose field 
of validity is situated in a sense between these great functionings 
and the bodies themselves with their materiality and their forces. 

Now, the study of this micro-physics presupposes that the power 
exercised on the body is conceived not as a property, but as a 
strategy, that its effects of domination are attributed not to ‘appro¬ 
priation’, but to dispositions, manoeuvres, tactics, techniques, 
functionings; that one should decipher in it a network of relations, 
constantly in tension, in activity, rather than a privilege that one 
might possess; that one should take as its model a perpetual battle 
