‘The horses tugged hard, each pulling straight on a limb, each 
horse held by an executioner. After a quarter of an hour, the same 
ceremony was repeated and finally, after several attempts, the 
direction of the horses had to be changed, thus: those at the arms 
were made to pull towards the head, those at the thighs towards the 
arms, which broke the arms at the joints. This was repeated several 
times without success. He raised his head and looked at himself. 
Two more horses had to be added to those harnessed to the thighs, 
which made six horses in all. Without success. 

‘Finally, the executioner, Samson, said to Monsieur Le Breton 
that there was no way or hope of succeeding, and told him to ask 


4 




The body of the condemned 


their Lordships if they wished him to have the prisoner cut into 
pieces. Monsieur Le Breton, who had come down from the town, 
ordered that renewed efforts be made, and this was done; but the 
horses gave up and one of those harnessed to the thighs fell to the 
ground. The confessors returned and spoke to him again. He said 
to them (I heard him): “Kiss me, gentlemen.” The parish priest of 
St Paul’s did not dare to, so Monsieur de Marsilly slipped under the 
rope holding the left arm and kissed him on the forehead. The 
executioners gathered round and Damiens told them not to swear, 
to carry out their task and that he did not think ill of them; he 
begged them to pray to God for him, and asked the parish priest 
of St Paul’s to pray for him at the first mass. 

‘After two or three attempts, the executioner Samson and he who 
had used the pincers each drew out a knife from his pocket and cut 
the body at the thighs instead of severing the legs at the joints; the 
four horses gave a tug and carried off the two thighs after them, 
namely, that of the right side first, the other following; then the 
same was done to the arms, the shoulders, the arm-pits and the four 
limbs; the flesh had to be cut almost to the bone, the horses pulling 
hard carried off the right arm first and the other afterwards. 

‘When the four limbs had been pulled away, the confessors came 
to speak to him; but his executioner told them that he was dead, 
though the truth was that I saw the man move, his lower jaw moving 
from side to side as if he were talking. One of the executioners even 
said shortly afterwards that when they had lifted the trunk to throw 
it on the stake, he was still alive. The four limbs were untied from 
the ropes and thrown on the stake set up in the enclosure in line 
with the scaffold, then the trunk and the rest were covered with logs 
and faggots, and fire was put to the straw mixed with this wood. 

‘... In accordance with the decree, the whole was reduced to 
ashes. The last piece to be found in the embers was still burning at 
half-past ten in the evening. The pieces of flesh and the trunk had 
taken about four hours to burn. The officers of whom I was one, 
as also was my son, and a detachment of archers remained in the 
square until nearly eleven o’clock. 

‘There were those who made something of the fact that a dog 
had lain the day before on the grass where the fire had been, had 
been chased away several times, and had always returned. But it is 


5 




Torture 


not difficult to understand that an animal found this place warmer 
than elsewhere’ (quoted in Zevaes, 201-14). 

Eighty years later, Leon Faucher drew up his rules ‘for the House 
of young prisoners in Paris’: 

‘Art. 17. The prisoners’ day will begin at six in the morning in 
winter and at five in summer. They will work for nine hours a day 
throughout the year. Two hours a day will be devoted to instruc¬ 
tion. Work and the day will end at nine o’clock in winter and at 
eight in summer. 

Art. 18. Rising. At the first drum-roll, the prisoners must rise and 
dress in silence, as the supervisor opens the cell doors. At the second 
drum-roll, they must be dressed and make their beds. At the third, 
they must line up and proceed to the chapel for morning prayer. 
There is a five-minute interval between each drum-roll. 

Art. 19. The prayers are conducted by the chaplain and followed 
by a moral or religious reading. This exercise must not last more 
than half an hour. 

Art. 20. Work. At a quarter to six in the summer, a quarter to 
seven in winter, the prisoners go down into the courtyard where 
they must wash their hands and faces, and receive their first ration 
of bread. Immediately afterwards, they form into work-teams and 
