enemy. Indeed, he is worse than an enemy, for it is from within 
society that he delivers his blows - he is nothing less than a traitor, 
a ‘monster’. How could society not have an absolute right over him.^ 
How could it not demand, quite simply, his elimination.^ And, 
although it is true that the principle of punishment must be sub¬ 
scribed to in the pact, must not each citizen, logically, accept the 
extreme penalty for those of them who attack them as a body. 
‘Every malefactor, by attacking the social rights, becomes, by his 
crimes, a rebel and a traitor to his country; by violating its laws he 
ceases to be a member of it; he even makes war upon it. In such a 
case the preservation of the state is inconsistent with his own, and 
one or the other must perish; in putting the guilty to death we slay 
not so much the citizen as the enemy.’® The right to punish has been 
shifted from the vengeance of the sovereign to the defence of 
society. But it now finds itself recombined with elements so strong 
that it becomes almost more to be feared. The malefactor has been 
saved from a threat that is by its very nature excessive, but he is 
exposed to a penalty that seems to be without bounds. It is a return 
to a terrible ‘super-power’. It brings with it the need to establish a 
principle of moderation for the power of punishment. 

‘Who does not shudder with horror when reading in history of so 
many terrible and useless torments, invented and coldly applied by 
monsters who took upon themselves the name of sage.®’ (Beccaria, 


90 



Generalized punishment 


87). Or again: ‘The laws summon me to the greatest punishment 
of crimes. I go with all the fury that it has inspired in me. But 
what is this.^ They even go beyond it. .. God, who has imprinted 
in our hearts an aversion to pain for ourselves and for our fellow 
men, are they then those same beings, whom thou hast created so 
weak and so sensible, who have invented such barbarous, such 
refined torturesi*’ (Lacretelle, 129). The principle of moderation in 
punishment, even when it is a question of punishing the enemy of 
the social body, is articulated first as a discourse of the heart. Or 
rather, it leaps forth like a cry from the body, which is revolted at 
the sight or at the imagination of too much cruelty. The formulation 
of the principle that penality must remain ‘humane’ is expressed by 
the reformers in the first person. It is as if the sensibility of the 
speaker were being expressed direcdy; as if the body of the philoso¬ 
pher or theoretician had come, between executioner and victim, to 
affirm his own law and to impose it finally on the entire economy 
of punishment. Does this lyricism express an inability to find a 
rational foundation for a penal arithmetic? Between the contractual 
principle that expels the criminal from society and the image of the 
monster ‘vomited’ by nature, where is one to find a limit, if not in a 
human nature that is manifested - not in the rigour of the law, 
not in the ferocity of the delinquent - but in the sensibility 
of the reasonable man who makes the law and does not commit 
crime? 

But this recourse to ‘sensibility’ does not exactly express a 
theoretical impossibility. In fact, it bears within it a principle of 
calculation. The body, the imagination, pain, the heart to be re¬ 
spected are not, in effect, those of the criminal that is to be punished, 
but those of the men who, having subscribed to the pact, have the 
right of exercising against him the power of assembly. The pain that 
must exclude any reduction in punishment is that felt by the judges 
or spectators with all the hardness of heart that it may bring with it, 
all the ferocity induced by familiarity, or on the contrary, ill- 
founded feelings of pity and indulgence; ‘Thank God for those 
gentle, sensitive souls on whom those horrible executions exert a 
kind of torture’ (Lacretelle, 131). What has to be arranged and 
calculated are the return effects of punishment on the punishing 
authority and the power that it claims to exercise. 


91 




Punishment 


Here the principle takes root that one should never apply ‘in¬ 
humane’ punishments to a criminal, who, nevertheless, may well be 
a traitor and a monster. If the law must now treat in a ‘humane’ way 
an individual who is ‘outside nature’ (whereas the old justice treated 
the ‘outlaw’ inhumanely), it is not on account of some profound 
humanity that the criminal conceals within him, but because of a 
necessary regulation of the effects of power. It is this ‘economic’ 
rationality that must calculate the penalty and prescribe the appro¬ 
priate techniques. ‘Humanity’ is the respectable name given to this 
economy and to its meticulous calculations. ‘Where punishment is 
concerned, the minimum is ordered by humanity and counselled by 
policy.’* 

So, in order to understand this techno-politics of punishment, let 
us take the extreme case, the ultimate crime: a deed of such enormity 
that it violates all the most respected laws. It is produced in circum¬ 
stances so extraordinary, in such profound secrecy, with such lack 
of restraint, as if at the very limit of possibility, that it could not 
