ment for the differential supervision of illegalities. In relation to this 
instrument, criminal justice plays the role of legal surety and prin¬ 
ciple of transmission. It is a relay in a general economy of illegalities, 
whose other elements are (not below it, but beside it) the police, the 
prison and delinquency. Police encroachment on justice and the 
force of inertia that the carceral institution opposes to justice are not 
new, nor are they the result of a sclerosis or of a gradual shift in 
power; it is a structural feature that characterizes punitive mechan¬ 
isms in modern societies. The magistrates can say what they like; 
penal justice, with all its theatrical apparatus, is intended to respond 
to the daily demand of an apparatus of supervision half submerged 
in the darkness in which police and delinquency are brought to¬ 
gether. Judges are the scarcely resisting employees of this appara- 
tus.i® They assist as far as they can in the constitution of delinquency, 
that is to say, in the differentiation of illegalities, in the supervision, 
colonization and use of certain of these illegalities by the illegality 
of the dominant class. 

Two figures stand out as representative of this process, which 
developed in the first thirty or forty years of the nineteenth century. 
First, there was Vidocq (cf. his Memoires and Histoire de Vidocq 
racontee par lid-meme). He was a man of the old illegalities, a Gil 


282 




Illegalities and delinquency 


Bias of the other end of the century, who soon took a turn for the 
worse: disturbances, adventures, swindlings, of which he was 
usually himself the victim, brawls and duels; successive enlistments 
and desertions, contacts with prostitution, gambling, pickpocketing 
and soon large-scale brigandage. But the almost mythical importance 
that he assumed in the eyes of his contemporaries was based not on 
this, perhaps embellished past; it was not even based on the fact that, 
for the first time in history, a former inmate of a convict-ship, 
redeemed or quite simply bought, became a chief of police, but 
rather on the fact that, in him, delinquency visibly assumed its 
ambiguous status as an object and instrument for a police apparatus 
that worked both against it and with it. Vidocq marks the moment 
when deliquency, detached from other illegalities, was invested by 
power and turned inside out. It was then that the direct, institutional 
coupling of police and delinquency took place: the disturbing 
moment when criminality became one of the mechanisms of power. 
A figure had haunted earlier times, that of the monstrous king, the 
source of all justice and yet besmirched with crime; another fear 
