that it is one of its tools. I would like to write the history of this 


3 ° 




The body of the condemned 


prison, with all the political investments of the body that it gathers 
together in its closed architecture. Why? Simply because I am 
interested in the past? No, if one means by that writing a history of 
the past in terms of the present. Yes, if one means writing the 
history of the present.^ 


31 




2. The spectacle of the scaffold 


The ordinance of 1670 regulated the general forms of penal practice 
up to the Revolution. It laid down the following hierarchy of 
penalties: ‘Death, judicial torture pending proof, penal servitude, 
flogging, amende honorable, banishment.’ A high proportion of 
physical punishment. Customs, the nature of the crimes, the status 
of the condemned accounted for still more variations. ‘Capital 
punishment comprises many kinds of death: some prisoners may be 
condemned to be hanged, others to having their hands cut off or 
their tongues cut out or pierced and then to be hanged; others, for 
more serious crimes, to be broken alive and to die on the wheel, 
after having their limbs broken; others to be broken until they die 
a natural death, others to be strangled and then broken, others to 
be burnt alive, others to be burnt after first being strangled; others 
to be drawn by four horses, others to have their heads cut off, and 
others to have their heads broken’ (Soulatges, 169-71). And Sou- 
latges adds, almost in passing, that there are also lighter penalties 
not mentioned by the ordinance: satisfaction to the injured party, 
warning, reprimand, a short period of imprisonment, prohibition 
from entering a certain area and, lastly, pecuniary punishments - 
fines or confiscation. 

But we must not be misled. There was a considerable gap between 
this arsenal of horrors and everyday penal practice. Public torture 
and execution was by no means the most frequent form of punish¬ 
ment. To us today the proportion of death sentences in the penal 
practice of the classical age may seem high: at the Chatelet^ during 
the period 1755-85 under 10 per cent of the sentences passed in¬ 
volved capital punishment: the wheel, the gallows or the stake 
(Petrovitch, 226flf); the Parlement of Flanders passed thirty-nine 
death sentences, out of a total of 260 sentences, between 1721 and 


32 




The spectacle of the scaffold 


1730 (and twenty-six out of 500 between 1781 and 1790 - cf. 
Dautricourt). But it must not be forgotten that the courts found 
many ways of relaxing the rigours of the penal system, either by 
refusing to prosecute offences that were too heavily punished or by 
modifying the definition of the crime; sometimes too the royal 
power indicated that some particularly severe ordinance was not to 
be applied too strictly (which was how Choiseul dealt with the 
declaration of 3 August 1744 on vagabonds - Choiseul, 128-9). 
In any case, the majority of the sentences involved banishment or 
fines: in a court such as that of the Chatelet (which dealt only with 
relatively serious offences), banishment represented over half the 
sentences passed between 1755 and 1785. But many of these non¬ 
corporal penalties were accompanied by additional penalties that 
involved a degree of torture: public exhibition, pillory, carcan, 
flogging, branding; this was the case for all sentences to the ‘galleys’ 
or to what was the equivalent for women - reclusion in the hospital; 
banishment was often preceded by public exhibition and branding; 
fines were sometimes accompanied by flogging. It was not only in 
the great solemn executions, but also in this additional form of 
punishment, that torture revealed the significant part it played in 
penality: every penalty of a certain seriousness had to involve an 
element of torture, of supplice. 

What is a supplice} ‘Corporal punishment, painful to a more or 
less horrible degree,’ said Jaucourt in his Encyclopedie article and 
added: ‘It is an inexplicable phenomenon that the extension of 
man’s imagination creates out of the barbarous and the cruel.’ 
Inexplicable, perhaps, but certainly neither irregular nor primitive. 
Torture is a technique; it is not an extreme expression of lawless 
rage. To be torture, punishment must obey three principal criteria: 
first, it must produce a certain degree of pain, which may be meas¬ 
ured exactly, or at least calculated, compared and hierarchized; 
death is a torture in so far as it is not simply a withdrawal of the 
right to live, but is the occasion and the culmination of a calculated 
