The disappearance of public executions marks therefore the decline 
of the spectacle; but it also marks a slackening of the hold on the 
body. In 1787, in an address to the Society for Promoting Political 
Enquiries, Benjamin Rush remarked: ‘I can only hope that the time 
is not far away when gallows, pillory, scaffold, flogging and wheel 
will, in the history of punishment, be regarded as the marks of the 
barbarity of centuries and of countries and as proofs of the feeble 
influence of reason and religion over the human mind’ (Teeters, 
1935, 30). Indeed, sixty years later. Van Meenen, opening the second 
penitentiary congress, in Brussels, recalled the time of his childhood 
as of a past age: ‘I have seen the ground strewn with wheels, 
gibbets, gallows, pillories; I have seen hideously stretched skeletons 
on wheels’ (Annales de la Chariti, 529-30). Branding had been 
abolished in England (1834) and in France (1832); in 1820, England 
no longer dared to apply the full punishment reserved for traitors 
(Thistlewood was not quartered). Only flogging still remained in a 
number of penal systems (Russia, England, Prussia). But, generally 


10 




The body of the condemned 

speaking, punitive practices had become more reticent. One no 
longer touched the body, or at least as little as possible, and then 
only to reach something other than the body itself. It might be 
objected that imprisonment, confinement, forced labour, penal 
servitude, prohibition from entering certain areas, deportation - 
which have occupied so important a place in modern penal systems - 
are ‘physical’ penalties: unlike fines, for example, they directly 
aflFect the body. But the punishment-body relation is not the same 
as it was in the torture during public executions. The body now 
serves as an instrument or intermediary: if one intervenes upon it 
to imprison it, or to make it work, it is in order to deprive the 
individual of a liberty that is regarded both as a right and as property. 
The body, according to this penality, is caught up in a system of 
constraints and privations, obligations and prohibitions. Physical 
pain, the pain of the body itself, is no longer the constituent element 
of the penalty. From being an art of unbearable sensations punish¬ 
ment has become an economy of suspended rights. If it is still 
necessary for the law to reach and manipulate the body of the con¬ 
vict, it will be at a distance, in the proper way, according to strict 
rules, and with a much ‘higher’ aim. As a result of this new restraint, 
a whole army of technicians took over from the executioner, the 
immediate anatomist of pain: warders, doctors, chaplains, psychia¬ 
trists, psychologists, educationalists; by their very presence near the 
prisoner, they sing the praises that the law needs: they reassure it 
that the body and pain are not the ultimate objects of its punitive 
action. Today a doctor must watch over those condemned to death, 
right up to the last moment - thus juxtaposing himself as the agent 
of welfare, as the alleviator of pain, with the official whose task it is 
to end life. This is worth thinking about. When the moment of 
execution approaches, the patients are injected with tranquillizers. 
A utopia of judicial reticence: take away life, but prevent the patient 
from feeling it; deprive the prisoner of all rights, but do not inflict 
pain; impose penalties free of all pain. Recourse to psycho-pharma¬ 
cology and to various physiological ‘disconnectors’, even if it is 
temporary, is a logical consequence of this ‘non-corporal’ penality. 

The modern rituals of execution attest to this double process: the 
disappearance of the spectacle and the elimination of pain. The same 
movement has affected the various European legal systems, each at 


II 




Torture 


its own rate: the same death for all - the execution no longer bears 
the specific mark of the crime or the social status of the criminal; a 
death that lasts only a moment - no torture must be added to it in 
advance, no further actions performed upon the corpse; an execution 
that affects life rather than the body. There are no longer any of 
those long processes in which death was both retarded by calculated 
interruptions and multiplied by a series of successive attacks. There 
are no longer any of those combinations of tortures that were 
organized for the killing of regicides, or of the kind advocated, at 
the beginning of the eighteenth century, by the anonymous author 
of Hanging not Punishment Enough (1701), by which the condemned 
man would be broken on the wheel, then flogged until he fainted, 
then hung up with chains, then finally left to die slowly of hunger. 
There are no longer any of those executions in which the condemned 
man was dragged along on a hurdle (to prevent his head smashing 
against the cobble-stones), in which his belly was opened up, his 
entrails quickly ripped out, so that he had time to see them, with his 
own eyes, being thrown on the fire; in which he was finally decapi¬ 
tated and his body quartered.^ The reduction of these ‘thousand 
deaths’ to strict capital punishment defines a whole new morality 
concerning the act of punishing. 

As early as i7<5o, a hanging machine had been tried out in 
England (for the execution of Lord Ferrer). It made use of a support, 
which opened under the feet of the condemned man, thus avoiding 
