
6. This will make possible in society an inversion of the tradi¬ 
tional discourse of crime. How can one extinguish the dubious glory 
of the criminal.^ This was a matter of grave concern to the law¬ 
makers of the eighteenth century. How can one silence the adven¬ 
tures of the great criminals celebrated in the almanacs, broadsheets 
and popular tales.^ If the recoding of punishment is well done, if the 
ceremony of mourning takes place as it should, the crime can no 
longer appear as anything but a misfortune and the criminal as an 
enemy who must be re-educated into social life. Instead of those 
songs of praise that turn the criminal into a hero, only those 
obstacle-signs that arrest the desire to commit the crime by the 
calculated fear of punishment will circulate in men’s discourse. The 
positive mechanics will operate to the full in the language of every 
day, which will constantly reinforce it with new accounts. Discourse 
will become the vehicle of the law: the constant principle of uni¬ 
versal recoding. The poets of the people will at last join those who 
call themselves the ‘missionaries of eternal reason’; they will become 
moralists. ‘Filled with these terrible images and salutary ideas, each 
citizen will spread them through his family and there, by long 
accounts delivered with as much fervour as they are avidly listened 
to, his children gathered around him, will open up their young 
memories to receive, in imperishable lineaments, the notion of 
crime and punishment, the love of law and country, the respect and 
trust of the magistrature. Country people, too, will be witnesses of 


112 



The gentle way in punishment 


these examples and will sow them around their huts, the taste of 
virtue will take root in these coarse souls, while the evil-doer, dis¬ 
mayed at the public joy, fearful at the sight of so many enemies, 
may abandon plans whose outcome will be as prompt as it is 
gloomy’ (Servan, 37). 

This, then, is how one must imagine the punitive city. At the 
crossroads, in the gardens, at the side of roads being repaired or 
bridges built, in workshops open to all, in the depths of mines that 
may be visited, will be hundreds of tiny theatres of punishment. 
Each crime will have its law; each criminal his punishment. It will 
be a visible punishment, a punishment that tells all, that explains, 
justifies itself, convicts: placards, different-coloured caps bearing 
inscriptions, posters, symbols, texts read or printed, tirelessly repeat 
the code. Scenery, perspectives, optical effects, trompe-Votil some¬ 
times magnify the scene, making it more fearful than it is, but also 
