of a milieu of delinquents, loyal to one another, hierarchized, ready 
to aid and abet any future criminal act: ‘Society prohibits associa¬ 
tions of more than twenty persons_and it constitutes for itself 

associations of 200, 500, 1,200 convicts in the maisons centrales, 
which are constructed for them ad hoc, and which it divides up for 
their greater convenience into workshops, courtyards, dormitories, 
refectories, where they can all meet together. . . And it multiplies 
them across France in such a way that, where there is a prison, 
there is an association ... and as many anti-social clubs’ (Moreau- 
Christophe, 7). And it is in these clubs that the education of the 
young first offender takes place; ‘The first desire that is born within 
him will be to learn from his cleverer seniors how to escape the 
rigours of the law; the first lesson will be derived from the strict 
logic of thieves who regard society as an enemy; the morality will 
be the informing and spying honoured in our prisons; the first 
passion to be aroused in him will be to frighten the young mind by 
these monsters that must have been born in the dungeon and which 
the pen refuses to name. . . Henceforth he has broken with every¬ 
thing that has bound him to society’ {L'Almanack populaire de 
France, 49-56). Faucher spoke of ‘barracks of crime’. 

- The conditions to which the free inmates are subjected neces¬ 
sarily condemn them to recidivism: they are under the surveillance 
of the police; they are assigned to a particular residence, or forbidden 
others; ‘they leave prison with a passport that they must show every¬ 
where they go and which mentions the sentence that they have 
served’ (Barbe Marbois, 17). Being on the loose, being unable to find 
work, leading the life of a vagabond are the most frequent factors in 
recidivism. The Gaiette des tribunaux, but also the workers’ news¬ 
papers, regularly cited cases like that of the worker convicted of 
theft, placed under surveillance at Rouen, caught again for theft, 
and whom no lawyers would defend; so he took it upon himself to 
speak before the court, told the story of his life, explained how, on 
leaving prison and forced to reside in a particular place, he was 
unable to take up his trade as a gilder, since as an ex-convict he was 



Prison 


turned down wherever he went; the police refused him the right to 
seek work elsewhere: he found himself unable to leave Rouen, with 
nothing to do but die of hunger and poverty as a result of this 
terrible surveillance. He went to the town hall and asked for work; 
for eight days he was given work in the cemeteries for fourteen sous 
a day: ‘But,’ he said, ‘I am young, I have a good appetite, I eat more 
than two pounds of bread a day at five sous a pound; what can I do 
with fourteen sous to feed myself, wash my clothes and find lodging.^ 
I was driven to despair, I wanted to become an honest man again; 
the surveillance plunged me back into misfortune. I became dis¬ 
gusted with everything; it was then that I met Lemaitre, who was 
also a pauper; we had to live and wicked thoughts of thieving came 
back to us.’i® 

- Lastly, the prison indirectly produces delinquents by throwing 
the inmate’s family into destitution: ‘The same order that sends the 
head of the family to prison reduces each day the mother to destitu¬ 
tion, the children to abandonment, the whole family to vagabondage 
and begging. It is in this way that crime can take root’ (Lucas, II, 64). 

It should be noted that this monotonous critique of the prison 
always takes one of two directions: either that the prison was in¬ 
sufficiently corrective, and that the penitentiary technique was still 
at the rudimentary stage; or that in attempting to be corrective it 
lost its power as punishment,ii that the true penitentiary technique 
was rigour,** and that prison was a double economic error: directly, 
by its intrinsic cost and, indirectly, by the cost of the delinquency 
that it did not abolish.** The answer to these criticisms was invariably 
the same: the reintroduction of the invariable principles of peniten¬ 
tiary technique. For a century and a half the prison had always been 
offered as its own remedy: the reactivation of the penitentiary 
techniques as the only means of overcoming their perpetual failure; 
the realization of the corrective project as the only method of over¬ 
coming the impossibility of implementing it. 

This is shown conclusively in the fact that the prisoners’ revolts 
of recent weeks* have been attributed to the fact that the reforms 
proposed in 1945 never really took effect; that one must therefore 
return to the fundamental principles of the prison. But these 

* A series of uprisings in French prisons, between 1972 and 1974, in 
protest against living conditions. 


268 



Illegalities and delinquency 


principles, of which such wonderful results are still expected today, 
are well enough known: for the past 150 years they have constituted 
the seven universal maxims of the good ‘penitential condition’. 

1. Penal detention must have as its essential function the trans¬ 
formation of the individual’s behaviour: ‘The reform of the convict 
as the principal aim of the penalty is a sacred principle whose formal 
