This, no doubt, is the value of the account published in the 
Gaiette des tribunaux for August 1840: ‘The judge: One must sleep 
at home. — Beasse: Have I got a home.^ - You live in perpetual vaga¬ 
bondage. - I work to earn my living. - What is your station in 
life.^ - My station: to begin with. I’m thirty-six at least; I don’t work 
for anybody. I’ve worked for myself for a long time now. I have my 
day station and my night station. In the day, for instance, I hand out 
leaflets free of charge to all the passers-by; I run after the stage- 


290 



Illegalities and delinquency 


coaches when they arrive and carry luggage for the passengers; I 
turn cart-wheels on the avenue de Neuilly; at night there are the 
shows; I open coach doors, I sell pass-out tickets; I’ve plenty to do. 

- It would be better for you to be put into a good house as an 
apprentice and learn a trade. - Oh, a good house, an apprenticeship, 
it’s too much trouble. And anyway the bourgeois ... always 
grumbling, no freedom. - Does not your father wish to reclaim you.^ 

- Haven’t got no father. - And your mother.^ - No mother neither, 
no parents, no friends, free and independent.’ Hearing his sentence 
of two years in a reformatory, Beasse ‘pulled an ugly face, then, 
recovering his good humour, remarked: “Two years, that’s never 
more than twenty-four months. Let’s be off, then.’’ ’ 

It was this scene that La Phalange took up. And the importance 
that the newspaper gave it, the extremely slow, careful analysis, 
shows that the Fourierists saw in such an everyday affair a play of 
fundamental forces. On the one hand, that of ‘civilization’, repre¬ 
sented by the judge, ‘living legality, the spirit and letter of the law’. 
It had its own system of coercion, which seemed to be the code, 
but which in fact was discipline. There had to be a place, a location, 
a compulsory insertion: ‘One sleeps at home, said the judge, because 
in fact, for him, everything must have a home, some dwelling, how¬ 
ever magnificent or mean; his task is not to provide one, but to 
force every individual to live in one.’ Moreover, one must have a 
station in life, a recognizable identity, an individuality fixed once 
and for all: ‘What is your station.^ This question is the simplest 
expression of the established order in society; such vagabondage is 
repugnant to it, disturbs it; one must have a stable, continuous long¬ 
term station, thoughts of the future, of a secure future, in order to 
reassure it against all attacks.’ In short, one should have a master, 
be caught up and situated within a hierarchy; one exists only when 
