to the state (it was estimated that this would save over 100,000 
pounds in Flanders); this would make it unnecessary to return 
money paid in taxes to the owners of woods ruined by vagabonds; 
it would create a mass of new workers, which would help ‘by com¬ 
petition to bring down the cost of labour’; lastly, it would enable the 
true poor to benefit, to the full, from necessary charity (Vilan, 68). 


I 2 I 




Punishment 


This useful pedagogy would revive for the lazy individual a liking 
for work, force him back into a system of interests in which labour 
would be more advantageous than laziness, form around him a 
small, miniature, simplified, coercive society in which the maxim, 
'he who wants to live must work’, would be clearly revealed. Work 
would be compulsory, but so too would be remuneration, which 
enables the prisoner to improve his lot during and after detention. 
‘The man who does not find his subsistence must be made to desire 
to procure it for himself by work; he is offered it by supervision and 
discipline; in a sense, he is forced to acquire it; he is then tempted 
by the bait of gain; corrected in his morals, accustomed to work, 
his anxiety aroused by the little money he has kept for his release,’ 
he has learned a trade ‘that will guarantee a subsistence without 
danger’ (Vilan, 107). This reconstruction of homo oeconomicus ex¬ 
cluded the use of penalties that were too short - this would prevent 
the acquisition of habits and skills of work - or too long - which 
would make any apprenticeship useless. ‘The term of six months 
is too short to correct criminals, and to bring them to the spirit of 
work’; on the other hand, ‘a life sentence throws them into despair; 
they become indifferent to the correction of their morals and to the 
spirit of work; they become concerned only with plans to escape 
and to rebel; and since the judgements that were passed on them 
did not deprive them of life, why should one seek to render it 
unbearable for them.^’ (Vilan, 102-3). The duration of the penalty 
has meaning only in relation to possible correction, and to an 
economic use of the corrected criminal. 

To the principle of work, the English models added, as an 
essential addition to correction, isolation. The outlines had been 
provided in 1775, by Hanway, who justified it first with negative 
reasons: promiscuity in the prison provided bad examples and possi¬ 
bilities of escape in the short term and of blackmail or complicity in 
the long term. The prison would be too much like a factory if one 
left the prisoners to work together. The positive reasons followed: 
isolation provides a ‘terrible shock’ which, while protecting the 
prisoner from bad influences, enables him to go into himself and 
rediscover in the depths of his conscience the voice of good; solitary 
work would then become not only an apprenticeship, but also an exer¬ 
cise in spiritual conversion; it would rearrange not only the complex 


122 




The gentle way in punishment 


of interests proper to homo oeconotmcus, but also the imperatives of 
the moral subject. The cell, that technique of Christian monachism, 
which had survived only in Catholic countries, becomes in this 
protestant society the instrument by which one may reconstitute 
both homo oeconomicus and the religious conscience. Between the 
crime and the return to right and virtue, the prison would constitute 
the ‘space between two worlds’ the place for the individual transfor¬ 
mation that would restore to the state the subject it had lost. Hanway 
called this apparams for modifying individuals a ‘reformatory’ (cf. 
Hanway). These were the general principles that Howard and 
Blackstone put into operation in 1779 when the independence of the 
United States put an end to deportation and when a law was being 
drawn up to modify the system of penalties. Imprisonment, with the 
purpose of transforming the soul and conduct, made its entry into 
the system of civil laws. The preamble of the bill, written by Black- 
stone and Howard, describes individual imprisonment in terms of 
its triple function as example to be feared, instrument of conversion 
and condition for an apprenticeship: subjected ‘to isolated detention, 
regular work and the influence of religious instruction’, certain 
criminals might not only inspire terror in those who would be 
tempted to imitate them, ‘but also to correct themselves and to 
acquire the habit of work’ (Preamble of the bill of 1779). Hence the 
decision to build two penitentiaries, one for men, one for women, 
in which the isolated prisoners would be put ‘to the most servile 
labours, most compatible with the ignorance, negligence and 
obstinacy of the criminals’: walking in a wheel to move a machine, 
fixing a winch, polishing marble, beating hemp, rasping logwood, 
cutting up rags, rope-making and sewing sacks. In fact, only one 
penitentiary was built, at Gloucester, and it corresponded only 
partially to the initial plan: total confinement for the most dangerous 
criminals; for the others, day work in common and separation at 
night. 

Then came the Philadelphia model. This was no doubt the most 
famous because it was associated in people’s minds with the political 
