of an as yet unknown, but profound geometry’ (Beausobre, 307). 

13 Journal pour I’instruction iUmentairty April 1816. Cf. Tronchot, who 
has calculated that pupils must have been given over 200 commands a 
day (without counting exceptional orders); for the morning alone 
twenty-six commands communicated by the voice, twenty-three by 
signs, thirty-seven by rings of the bell, and twenty-four by whistle, 
which means a blow on the whistle or a ring on the bell every three 
minutes. 

2 The means of correct training ^ 

1 Riglementpour 1 ’infanterie prussienru, Fr. trans.. Arsenal, MS. 4067, fo. 
144. For older plans see Praissac, 27-8 and Montgommery, 77. For the 
new plans, cf. Beneton de Morange, His wire de la guerre, 1741, 61-4 
and Dissertations sur les Tentes-, cf. also the many regulations such as 
the Instruction sur le service des reglements de Cavcderie dans les camps, 
29 June 1753. 

2 Arch. nat. MM 666-9. Jeremy Bentham recounts that it was while 
visiting the £cole Militaire that his brother first had the idea of the 
Panopticon. 

3 Demia, 27-9. One might note a phenomenon of the same kind in the 
organization of schools; for a long time ‘prefects’ were, independently 
of the teachers, entrusted with the moral responsibility for small groups 
of pupils. After 1762, above all, one sees the appearance of a new 
type of supervision, which was more administrative and more inte¬ 
grated into the hierarchy; supervisors, maitres de quartier, maitres 
subalternes. Cf. Dupont-Ferrier, 254 and 476. 

3 Panopticism 

I Archives militaires de Vincennes, A 1,516 91 sc. Piece. This regula¬ 
tion is broadly similar to a whole series of others that date from the 
same period and earlier. 


316 



Notes 


2 In the Postscript to the Panopticon, *791* Bentham adds dark inspec¬ 
tion galleries painted in black around the inspector’s lodge, each 
making it possible to observe two storeys of cells. 

3 In his first version of the Panopticon, Bentham had also imagined an 
acoustic surveillance, operated by means of pipes leading from the 
cells to the central tower. In the Postscript he abandoned the idea, 
perhaps because he could not introduce into it the principle of dis¬ 
symmetry and prevent the prisoners from hearing the inspector as well 
as the inspector hearing them. Julius tried to develop a system of dis¬ 
symmetrical listening (Julius, i8). 

4 Imagining this continuous flow of visitors entering the central tower 
by an underground passage and then observing the circular landscape 
of the Panopticon, was Bentham aware of the Panoramas that Barker 
was constructing at exactly the same period (the first seems to have 
dated from 1787) and in which the visitors, occupying the central 
place, saw unfolding around them a landscape, a city or a battle. The 
visitors occupied exactly the place of the sovereign gaze. 

5 In the second half of the eighteenth century, it was often suggested 
that the army should be used for the surveillance and general partition¬ 
ing of the population. The army, as yet to undergo discipline in the 
seventeenth century, was regarded as a force capable of instilling it. 
Cf., for example, Servan, Le Soldat citoyen, 1780. 

6 Arsenal, MS. 25(35. Under this number, one also finds regulations for 
charity associations of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 

7 Le Maire in a memorandum written at the request of Sartine, in 
answer to sixteen questions posed by Joseph II on the Parisian police. 
This memorandum was published by Gazier in 1879. 

PART FOUR PRISON 

I Complete and austere institutions 

1 The play between the two ‘natures’ of the prison still continues. A few 
days ago [summer 1974] the head of state recalled the ‘principle’ that 
detention ought to be no more than a ‘deprivation of liberty’ - the pure 
essence of imprisonment, freed of the reality of prison; and added that 
the prison could be justified only by its ‘corrective’ or rehabilitating 
effects. 

2 Treilhard, 8-9. The same theme is often to be found in the years 
immediately prior to this: ‘The penalty of detention pronounced by 
the law has above all the object of correcting individuals, that is to say, 
of making them better, of preparing them by trials of shorter or longer 


317 



Notes 
