If the penality in its most severe forms no longer addresses itself 
to the body, on what does it lay hold.^ The answer of the theoreti¬ 
cians - those who, about 1760, opened up a new period that is not 
yet at an end - is simple, almost obvious. It seems to be contained 
in the question itself: since it is no longer the body, it must be the 
soul. The expiation that once rained down upon the body must be 
replaced by a punishment that acts in depth on the heart, the 
thoughts, the will, the inclinations. Mably formulated the principle 
once and for all: ‘Punishment, if I may so put it, should strike the 
soul rather than the body’ (Mably, 326). 

It was an important moment. The old partners of the spectacle 
of punishment, the body and the blood, gave way. A new character 




The body of the condemned 


came on the scene, masked. It was the end of a certain kind of 
tragedy; comedy began, with shadow play, faceless voices, impalp¬ 
able entities. The apparatus of punitive justice must now bite into 
this bodiless reality. 

Is this any more than a mere theoretical assertion, contradicted 
by penal practice.^ Such a conclusion would be over-hasty. It is true 
that, today, to punish is not simply a matter of converting a soul; 
but Mably’s principle has not remained a pious wish. Its effects can 
be felt throughout modern penality. 

To begin with, there is a substitution of objects. By this I do not 
mean that one has suddenly set about punishing other crimes. No 
doubt the definition of offences, the hierarchy of their seriousness, 
the margins of indulgence, what was tolerated in fact and what was 
legally permitted - all this has considerably changed over the last 
200 years; many crimes have ceased to be so because they were 
bound up with a certain exercise of religious authority or a par¬ 
ticular type of economic activity; blasphemy has lost its status as a 
crime; smuggling and domestic larceny some of their seriousness. 
But these displacements are perhaps not the most important fact: 
the division between the permitted and the forbidden has preserved 
a certain constancy from one century to another. On the other 
hand, ‘crime’, the object with which penal practice is concerned, has 
profoundly altered: the quality, the nature, in a sense the substance 
of which the punishable element is made, rather than its formal 
definition. Undercover of the relative stability of the law, a mass of 
subtle and rapid changes has occurred. Certainly the ‘crimes’ and 
‘offences’ on which judgement is passed are juridical objects defined 
by the code, but judgement is also passed on the passions, instincts, 
anomalies, infirmities, maladjustments, effects of environment or 
heredity; acts of aggression are punished, so also, through them, is 
aggressivity; rape, but at the same time perversions; murders, but 
also drives and desires. But, it will be objected, judgement is not 
actually being passed on them; if they are referred to at all it is to 
explain the actions in question, and to determine to what extent the 
the subject’s will was involved in the crime. This is no answer. For 
it is these shadows lurking behind the case itself that are judged and 
punished. They are judged indirectly as ‘attenuating circumstances’ 
that introduce into the verdict not only ‘circumstantial’ evidence. 


17 



Torture 


but something quite different, which is not juridically codifiable: 
the knowledge of the criminal, one’s estimation of him, what is 
known about the relations between him, his past and his crime, and 
what might be expected of him in the future. They are also judged 
by the interplay of all those notions that have circulated between 
medicine and jurisprudence since the nineteenth century (the ‘mon¬ 
sters’ of Georget’s times, Chaumie’s ‘psychical anomalies’, the 
‘perverts’ and ‘maladjusted’ of our own experts) and which, behind 
the pretext of explaining an action, are ways of defining an indivi¬ 
dual. They are punished by means of a punishment that has the 
function of making the offender ‘not only desirous, but also capable, 
of living within the law and of providing for his own needs’; they 
are punished by the internal economy of a penalty which, while 
intended to punish the crime, may be altered (shortened or, in 
certain cases, extended) according to changes in the prisoner’s 
behaviour; and they are punished by the ‘security measures’ that 
accompany the penalty (prohibition of entering certain areas, pro¬ 
bation, obligatory medical treatment), and which are intended not 
to punish the offence, but to supervise the individual, to neutralize 
his dangerous state of mind, to alter his criminal tendencies, and to 
continue even when this change has been achieved. The criminal’s 
soul is not referred to in the trial merely to explain his crime and 
as a factor in the juridical apportioning of responsibility; if it is 
brought before the court, with such pomp and circumstance, such 
concern to understand and such ‘scientific’ application, it is because 
it too, as well as the crime itself, is to be judged and to share in the 
punishment. Throughout the penal ritual, from the preliminary 
investigation to the sentence and the final effects of the penalty, a 
domain has been penetrated by objects that not only duplicate, but 
also dissociate the juridically defined and coded objects. Psychiatric 
expertise, but also in a more general way criminal anthropology and 
