that would be more or less extended according to the nature of his 
crime’; France has all too many impracticable roads that impede 
trade; thieves who also obstruct the free circulation of goods could 
be put to rebuilding the highways. Far more telling than death 
would be ‘the example of a man who is ever before one’s eyes, whom 
one has deprived of liberty and who is forced to spend the rest of 
his days repairing the loss that he has caused society’ (Boucher 
d’Argis, 1781, 139). 

In the old system, the body of the condemned man became the 
king’s property, on which the sovereign left his mark and brought 
down the effects of his power. Now he will be rather the property 
of society, the object of a collective and useful appropriation. This 
explains why the reformers almost always proposed public works 
as one of the best possible penalties; in this, they were supported by 
the Cahiers de doleancesi ‘Let those condemned to penalties short of 
death be put to the public works of the country for a time propor¬ 
tionate to their crime.’* Public works meant two things: the collec¬ 
tive interest in the punishment of the condemend man and the 
visible, verifiable character of the punishment. Thus the convict 
pays twice; by the labour he provides and by the signs that he 
produces. At the heart of society, on the public squares or highways, 
the convict is a focus of profit and signification. Visibly, he is 
serving everyone; but, at the same time, he lets slip into the minds 
of all the crime-punishment sign: a secondary, purely moral, but 
much more real utility. 

5. Hence a whole learned economy of publicity. In physical 


109 




Punishment 


torture, the example was based on terror: physical fear, collective 
horror, images that must be engraved on the memories of the specta¬ 
tors, like the brand on the cheek or shoulder of the condemned man. 
The example is now based on the lesson, the discourse, the decipher¬ 
able sign, the representation of public morality. It is no longer the 
terrifying restoration of sovereignty that will sustain the ceremony 
of punishment, but the reactivation of the code, the collective rein¬ 
forcements of the link between the idea of crime and the idea of 
punishment. In the penalty, rather than seeing the presence of the 
sovereign, one will read the laws themselves. The laws associated 
a particular crime with a particular punishment. As soon as the 
crime is committed, the punishment will follow at once, enacting the 
discourse of the law and showing that the code, which links ideas, 
also links realities. The junction, immediate in the text, must be 
immediate in acts. ‘Consider those first movements in which the 
news of some horrible act spreads through our towns and country¬ 
side; the citizens are like men who see lightning falling about them; 
everyone is moved by indignation and horror. . . That is the 
moment to punish the crime: do not let it slip by; hasten to prove 
it and judge it. Set up scaffolds, stakes, drag out the guilty man to 
the public squares, summon the people with great cries; you will 
then hear them applaud the proclamation of your judgements, as the 
proclamation of peace and liberty; you will see them run to these 
terrible spectacles as to the triumph of the laws’ (Servan, 35-6). 
Public punishment is the ceremony of immediate recoding. 

The law is re-formed: it takes up its place on the side of the crime 
that violated it. The criminal, on the other hand, is detached from 
society, he leaves it. But not in those ambiguous festivals of the 
Ancien Regime in which the people inevitably took part, either in 
the crime or in the execution, but in a ceremony of mourning. The 
society that has rediscovered its laws has lost the citizen who vio¬ 
lated them. Public punishment must manifest this double affliction: 
that a citizen should have been capable of ignoring the law and that 
one should have been obliged to separate oneself from a citizen. 
‘Associate the scaffold with the most lugubrious and most moving 
ceremonies; let this terrible day be a day of mourning for the nation; 
let the general sorrow be painted everywhere in bold letters... Let 
the magistrate, wearing black, funereal crepe, announce the crime 


no 




The gentle way in punishment 


and the sad necessity of a legal vengeance to the people. Let the 
different scenes of this tragedy strike all the senses, stir all gentle, 
honest affections’ (Dufau, 688). 

The meaning of this mourning must be clear to all; each element 
of its ritual must speak, repeat the crime, recall the law, show the 
need for punishment and justify its degree. Posters, placards, signs, 
symbols must be distributed, so that everyone may learn their 
significations. The publicity of punishment must not have the 
physical effect of terror; it must open up a book to be read. Le 
Peletier suggested that, once a month, the people should be allowed 
to visit convicts, ‘in their mournful cells: they will read, written in 
bold letters above the door, the name of the convict, his crime and 
