41 




Torture 


death. How can a penalty be used as a means.^ one was later to ask. 
How can one treat as a punishment what ought to be a method of 
demonstration.^ The reason is to be found in the way in which 
criminal justice, in the classical period, operated the production of 
truth. The different pieces of evidence did not constitute so many 
neutral elements, until such time as they could be gathered together 
into a single body of evidence that would bring the final certainty 
of guilt. Each piece of evidence aroused a particular degree of 
abomination. Guilt did not begin when all the evidence was gathered 
together; piece by piece, it was constituted by each of the elements 
that made it possible to recognize a guilty person. Thus a semi¬ 
proof did not leave the suspect innocent until such time as it was 
completed; it made him semi-guilty; slight evidence of a serious 
crime marked someone as slightly criminal. In short, penal demon¬ 
stration did not obey a dualistic system: true or false; but a 
principle of continuous gradation; a degree reached in the demon¬ 
stration already formed a degree of guilt and consequently involved 
a degree of punishment. The suspect, as such, always deserved a 
certain punishment; one could not be the object of suspicion and be 
completely innocent. Suspicion implied an element of demonstration 
as regards the judge, the mark of a certain degree of guilt as regards 
the suspect and a limited form of penalty as regards punishment. A 
suspect, who remained a suspect, was not for all that declared inno¬ 
cent, but was partially punished. When one reached a certain degree 
of presumption, one could then legitimately bring into play a 
practice that had a dual role; to begin the punishment in pursuance 
of the information already collected and to make use of this first 
stage of punishment in order to extort the truth that was still miss¬ 
ing. In the eighteenth century, judicial torture functioned in that 
strange economy in which the ritual that produced the truth went 
side by side with the ritual that imposed the punishment. The body 
interrogated in torture constituted the point of application of the 
punishment and the locus of extortion of the truth. And just as 
presumption was inseparably an element in the investigation and a 
fragment of guilt, the regulated pain involved in judicial torture 
was a means both of punishment and of investigation. 

Now, curiously enough, this interlocking of the two rituals 


42 



The spectacle of the scaffold 


through the body continued, evidence having been confirmed and 
sentence passed, in the actual carrying out of the penalty; and the 
body of the condemned man was once again an essential element in 
the ceremonial of public punishment. It was the task of the guilty 
man to bear openly his condemnation and the truth of the crime 
that he had committed. His body, displayed, exhibited in procession, 
tortured, served as the public support of a procedure that had 
hitherto remained in the shade; in him, on him, the sentence had to 
be legible for all. This immediate, striking manifestation of the 
truth in the public implementation of penalties assumed, in the 
eighteenth century, several aspects. 

1. It made the guilty man the herald of his own condemnation. 
He was given the task, in a sense, of proclaiming it and thus attesting 
to the truth of what he had been charged with: the procession 
through the streets, the placard attached to his back, chest or head 
as a reminder of the sentence; the halts at various crossroads, the 
reading of the sentence, the amende honorable performed at the doors 
of churches, in which the condemned man solemnly acknowledged 
his crime: ‘Barefoot, wearing a shirt, carrying a torch, kneeling, to 
say and to declare that wickedly, horribly, treacherously, he has 
committed the most detestable crime, etc.’; exhibition at a stake 
where his deeds and the sentence were read out; yet another reading 
of the sentence at the foot of the scaffold; whether he was to go 
simply to the pillory or to the stake and the wheel, the condemned 
man published his crime and the justice that had been meted out to 
him by bearing them physically on his body. 

2. It took up once again the scene of the confession. It dupli¬ 
cated the forced proclamation of the amende honorable with a 
spontaneous, public acknowledgement. It established the public 
execution as the moment of truth. These last moments, when the 
guilty man no longer has anything to lose, are won for the full light 
of truth. After the passing of the sentence, the court could decide 
on some new torture to obtain the names of possible accomplices. 
It was also recognized that at the very moment he mounted the 
scaffold the condemned man could ask for a respite in order to make 
new revelations. The public expected this new turn in the course of 
truth. Many made use of it in order to gain time, as did Michel 
Barbier, found guilty of armed assault: ‘He stared impudently at the 


43 


