enough. As opposed to the ruined prisons, littered with mechanisms 
of torture, to be seen in Piranese’s engravings, the Panopticon 
presents a cruel, ingenious cage. The fact that it should have given 
rise, even in our own time, to so many variations, projected or 
realized, is evidence of the imaginary intensity that it has possessed 
for almost two hundred years. But the Panopticon must not be 
understood as a dream building: it is the diagram of a mechanism of 
power reduced to its ideal form; its functioning, abstracted from any 
obstacle, resistance or friction, must be represented as a pure archi¬ 
tectural and optical system: it is in fact a figure of political technology 
that may and must be detached from any specific use. 

It is polyvalent in its applications; it serves to reform prisoners, 
but also to treat patients, to instruct schoolchildren, to confine the 
insane, to supervise workers, to put beggars and idlers to work. It is 
a type of location of bodies in space, of distribution of individuals 
in relation to one another, of hierarchical organization, of disposi¬ 
tion of centres and channels of power, of definition of the instru¬ 
ments and modes of intervention of power, which can be implemen¬ 
ted in hospitals, workshops, schools, prisons. Whenever one is 
dealing with a multiplicity of individuals on whom a task or a 
particular form of behaviour must be imposed, the panoptic schema 
may be used. It is - necessary modifications apart - applicable ‘to 
all establishments whatsoever, in which, within a space not too large 


205 




Discipline 


to be covered or commanded by buildings, a number of persons are 
meant to be kept under inspection’ (Bentham, 40; although Bentham 
takes the penitentiary house as his prime example, it is because it has 
many different functions to fulfil - safe custody, confinement, 
solitude, forced labour and instruction). 

In each of its applications, it makes it possible to perfect the exer¬ 
cise of power. It does this in several ways: because it can reduce the 
number of those who exercise it, while increasing the number of 
those on whom it is exercised. Because it is possible to intervene at 
any moment and because the constant pressure acts even before the 
offences, mistakes or crimes have been committed. Because, in these 
conditions, its strength is that it never intervenes, it is exercised 
spontaneously and without noise, it constitutes a mechanism whose 
effects follow from one another. Because, without any physical 
instrument other than architecture and geometry, it acts directly on 
