trary does not occur every day whether, with a great fortune and an 
elevated rank in society, one does not hnd a thousand solutions, a 
thousand means to hush up some unfortunate affair.’ 

27 In La Fratemiti, March 1847, there is a discussion of the Drouillard 
affair and reference is made to thefts in the naval administration at 
Rochefort. In June 1847, there was an article on the Boulmy trial and 
on the Cubi^re-Pellaprat affair; and, in July-August 1847, on the 
Benier-Lagrange-Jussieu affair, which involved misappropriation of 
public funds. 

28 ‘Licensed prostitution, direct material theft, house-breaking, murder, 
brigandage for the lower classes; while skilful spoliation, indirect, 
refined theft, clever exploitation of human cattle, carefully planned 
and brilliantly executed betrayals, transcendent pieces of sharp practice 
in short, all the truly elegant vices and lucrative crimes which the law 
is far too polite to interrupt remain the monopoly of the upper classes’ 
(i December 1838). 

29 Cf., for example, what La Phalange said of Delacollonge or of Elira- 
bide on i August 183d and 2 October 1840. 

3 The carceral 

1 ‘Anything that helps to tire the body helps to expel bad thoughts; so 
care is taken that games consist of violent exercise. At night, they fall 
asleep the moment they touch the pillow’ (Ducp6tiaux, 1854, 375-6). 

2 Cf., for example, the following description of workers’ accommodation 
built at Lille in the mid-nineteenth century: ‘Cleanliness is the order 
of the day. It is the heart of the regulations. There are a number of 
severe provisions against noise, drunkenness, disorders of all kinds. 
A serious offence brings expulsion. Brought back to regular habits of 
order and economy, the workers no longer desert the workshops on 
Mondays. . . The children are better supervised and are no longer a 
cause of scandal. . . Prizes are given for the upkeep of the dwellings. 


324 




Notes 


for good behaviour, for signs of devotion and each year these prizes 
are competed for by a large number of competitors’ (Houz6 de 
I’Aulnay, 13-15). 

