We have, then, a public execution and a time-table. They do not 
punish the same crimes or the same type of delinquent. But they 
each define a certain penal style. Less than a century separates them. 
It was a time when, in Europe and in the United States, the entire 
economy of punishment was redistributed. It was a time of great 
‘scandals’ for traditional justice, a time of innumerable projects for 
reform. It saw a new theory of law and crime, a new moral or politi¬ 
cal justification of the right to punish; old laws were abolished, old 
customs died out. ‘Modern’ codes were planned or drawn up: 
Russia, 1769; Prussia, 1780; Pennsylvania and Tuscany, 1786; 
Austria, 1788; France, 1791, Year IV, 1808 and 1810. It was a new 
age for penal justice. 

Among so many changes, I shall consider one: the disappearance 
of torture as a public spectacle. Today we are rather inclined to ig¬ 
nore it; perhaps, in its time, it gave rise to too much inflated rhetoric; 
perhaps it has been attributed too readily and too emphatically to a 
process of ‘humanization’, thus dispensing with the need for further 
analysis. And, in any case, how important is such a change, when 
compared with the great institutional transformations, the formula¬ 
tion of explicit, general codes and unified rules of procedure; with 
the almost universal adoption of the jury system, the definition of 


7 



Torture 


the essentially corrective character of the penalty and the tendency, 
which has become increasingly marked since the nineteenth century, 
to adapt punishment to the individual offender? Punishment of a 
less immediately physical kind, a certain discretion in the art of 
inflicting pain, a combination of more subtle, more subdued suffer¬ 
ings, deprived of their visible display, should not all this be treated 
as a special case, an incidental effect of deeper changes? And yet the 
fact remains that a few decades saw the disappearance of the tor¬ 
tured, dismembered, amputated body, symbolically branded on face 
or shoulder, exposed alive or dead to public view. The body as the 
major target of penal repression disappeared. 

By the end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth 
cenmry, the gloomy festival of punishment was dying out, though 
here and there it flickered momentarily into life. In this transforma¬ 
tion, two processes were at work. They did not have quite the same 
chronology or the same raison d'etre. The first was the disappearance 
of punishment as a spectacle. The ceremonial of punishment tended 
to decline; it survived only as a new legal or administrative practice. 
