of preventing and correcting deformities of the body in 
children). 1749. 









2. The means of correct training 


At the beginning of the seventeenth century, Walhausen spoke of 
‘strict discipline’ as an art of correct training. The chief function of 
the disciplinary power is to ‘train’, rather than to select and to levy; 
or, no doubt, to train in order to levy and select all the more. It does 
not link forces together in order to reduce them; it seeks to bind them 
together in such a way as to multiply and use them. Instead of bend¬ 
ing ail its subjects into a single uniform mass, it separates, analyses, 
differentiates, carries its procedures of decomposition to the point of 
necessary and sufficient single units. It ‘trains’ the moving, confused, 
useless multitudes of bodies and forces into a multiplicity of indivi¬ 
dual elements - small, separate cells, organic autonomies, genetic 
identities and continuities, combinatory segments. Discipline 
‘makes’ individuals; it is the specific technique of a power that 
regards individuals both as objects and as instruments of its exercise. 
It is not a triumphant power, which because of its own excess can 
pride itself on its omnipotence; it is a modest, suspicious power, 
which functions as a calculated, but permanent economy. These 
are humble modalities, minor procedures, as compared with the 
majestic rituals of sovereignty or the great apparatuses of the state. 
And it is precisely they that were gradually to invade the major 
forms, altering their mechanisms and imposing their procedures. The 
legal apparatus was not to escape this scarcely secret invasion. The 
success of disciplinary power derives no doubt from the use of simple 
instruments; hierarchical observation, normalizing judgement and 
their combination in a procedure that is specific to it, the examination. 

Hierarchical observation 

The exercise of discipline presupposes a mechanism that coerces by 
means of observation; an apparatus in which the techniques that 


170 



