

Notes 


PART TWO PUNISHMENT 

I Genercdiiedpunishment 

1 Mogensen, 326. The author shows that in Auge crimes of violence 
were four times less numerous on the eve of the Revolution than at the 
end of the reign of Louis XIV. Generally speaking, the work directed 
by Pierre Chaunu on criminality in Normandy shows the same rise in 
fraud at the expense of violence. Cf. articles by B. Boutelet, J. C. 
Gegot and V. Boucheron in the Annales de Normandie of 1962, 1966 
and 1971. For Paris, cf. Petrovitch. The same phenomenon, it seems, 
took place in England: cf. Hibbert, 72 and Tobias, yjS.. 

2 Le Roy-Ladurie, 1973. Cf. also Farge who confirms this tendency: 
between 1750 and 1755,5 per cent of those convicted for stealing food 
were sent to the galleys, but 15 per cent between 1775 and 1790: ‘The 
courts became more severe as time went on... The values useful to a 
society that wished to be ordered and respectful of property were 
under threat’ (Farge, 130-42). 

3 On this criticism of ‘excessive power’ and of its bad distribution in the 
judicial apparatus, cf. in particular Dupaty, 1788, Lacretelle and 
Target. 

4 Cf. N. Bergasse on the judicial power: ‘Deprived of any kind of 
activity against the political regime of the State and having no influ¬ 
ence on the wills that come together to form that regime or to maintain 
it, it must have at its disposal, in order to protect all individuals and all 
rights, such a force that, all-powerful in defending and assisting that 
regime, it should become absolutely nil as soon as its destination is 
changed in any attempt to use it to oppress’ (Bergasse, 11-12). 

5 Rousseau, 28. It should be noted that these ideas of Rousseau’s were 
used in the Constituent Assembly by certain deputies who wished to 
maintain a system of very strict penalties. And, curiously enough, the 
principles of the Social Contract could be used to support the old 
correspondence of atrocity between crime and punishment. ‘The pro¬ 
tection due to citizens requires that penalties be measured according 
to the atrocity of the crimes and not sacrifice, in the name of humanity, 
humanity itself (Mougins de Roquefort, who quotes this passage from 
the Social Contract: cf. Mougins, 637). 

6 Duport, Archives parlementaires, X, 744. One rriight also cite in 
support the different competitions proposed at the end of the eigh¬ 
teenth century by learned societies and academies: ‘How is the mild¬ 
ness of these investigations and penalties to be reconciled with the 

, certainties of a prompt and exemplary punishment, so that civil society 

311 


Notes 


finds the greatest possible security for liberty and humanity?’ (Eco¬ 
nomic Society of Berne, 1777). Marat responded with his Plan de 
Legislation criminelle. ‘What are the means of alleviating the rigour of 
the penal laws in France without damage to public safety?’ (Acaddmie 
de Chalons-sur-Marne, 1780; the winners were Brissot and Bemardi); 
‘does the extreme severity of the laws tend to diminish the number and 
enormity of crimes in a depraved nation?’ (Acad^mie de Marseille, 
1786; the winner was Eymar). 

7 G. Target, Observations sur le projet du Code pinal, in Locr^, 7-8. It 
is to be found in an inverted form in Kant. 

8 ‘Society does not see in the punishments it inflicts the barbarous 
pleasure of making a human being suffer; it sees it as a necessary 
precaution to prevent similar crimes, to protect society from the evils 
with which murder threatens it’ (Bamave, 9). 

9 Beccaria, 26. Cf. also Brissot: ‘If pardon is equitable, the law is bad; 
when legislation is good, pardons are only crimes against the law’ 
(Brissot, 200). 

10 Mably, 327. Cf. also Vattel: ‘It is not so much the atrocity of the 
penalties as the exactitude with which they are carried out that keeps 
everybody within his duty’ (Mably, 163). 

11 Contrary to what Carnot or Helie and Chauveau say, recidivism was 
very clearly punished in a number of laws under the Ancien Regime. 
The ordinance of 1549 declares that the malefactor who repeats his 
crime is an ‘execrable, infamous being, eminently pernicious to the 
commonwealth’; recidivism for blasphemy, theft, vagabondage, etc., 
were subject to special penalties. 

12 Le Peletier, 321-2. The following year, Bellart made what may be 
regarded as the first defence of a crime passionel. This was the Gras 
affair. Cf. Armales du barreau rrtodeme, 1823, III, 34. 

2 The gentle way in punishment 

1 Le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau. The authors who abandoned the death 
penalty envisaged some definite penalties; Brissot, 29-30. Dufriche de 
