when the normal took over from the ancestral, and measurement 
from status, thus substituting for the individuality of the memorable 
man that of the calculable man, that moment when the sciences of 
man became possible is the moment when a new technology of 
power and a new political anatomy of the body were implemented. 
And if from the early Middle Ages to the present day the ‘adventure’ 
is an account of individuality, the passage from the epic to the 
novel, from the noble deed to the secret singularity, from long 
exiles to the internal search for childhood, from combats to phan¬ 
tasies, it is also inscribed in the formation of a disciplinary society. 
The adventure of our childhood no longer finds expression in ‘le 


193 




Discipline 


bon petit Henri', but in the misfortunes of ‘little Hans’. The Romance 
of the Rose is written today by Mary Barnes; in the place of Lancelot, 
we have Judge Schreber. 

It is often said that the model of a society that has individuals 
as its constituent elements is borrowed from the abstract juridical 
forms of contract and exchange. Mercantile society, according to 
this view, is represented as a contractual association of isolated 
juridical subjects. Perhaps. Indeed, the political theory of the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries often seems to follow this 
schema. But it should not be forgotten that there existed at the same 
period a technique for constituting individuals as correlative ele¬ 
ments of power and knowledge. The individual is no doubt the 
fictitious atom of an ‘ideological’ representation of society; but he is 
also a reality fabricated by this specific technology of power that I 
have called ‘discipline’. We must cease once and for all to describe 
the effects of power in negative terms: it ‘excludes’, it ‘represses’, 
it ‘censors’, it ‘abstracts’, it ‘masks’, it ‘conceals’. In fact, power 
produces; it produces reality; it produces domains of objects and 
rituals of truth. The individual and the knowledge that may be 
gained of him belong to this production. 

Is it not somewhat excessive to derive such power from the petty 
machinations of discipline.^ How could they achieve effects of such 
scope.^ 


194 




3. Panopticism 


The following, according to an order published at the end of the 
seventeenth century, were the measures to be taken when the plague 
appeared in a town.^ 

First, a strict spatial partitioning: the closing of the town and its 
outlying districts, a prohibition to leave the town on pain of death, 
the killing of all stray animals; the division of the town into distinct 
quarters, each governed by an intendant. Each street is placed under 
the authority of a syndic, who keeps it under surveillance; if he 
leaves the street, he will be condemned to death. On the appointed 
day, everyone is ordered to stay indoors: it is forbidden to leave 
on pain of death. The syndic himself comes to lock the door of 
each house from the outside; he takes the key with him and hands 
it over to the intendant of the quarter; the intendant keeps it until 
the end of the quarantine. Each family will have made its own 
provisions; but, for bread and wine, small wooden canals are set up 
between the street and the interior of the houses, thus allowing each 
person to receive his ration without communicating with the sup¬ 
pliers and other residents; meat, fish and herbs will be hoisted up 
into the houses with pulleys and baskets. If it is absolutely necessary 
to leave the house, it will be done in turn, avoiding any meeting. 
Only the intendants, syndics and guards will move about the 
streets and also, between the infected houses, from one corpse to 
another, the ‘crows’, who can be left to die: these are ‘people of little 
substance who carry the sick, bury the dead, clean and do many vile 
and abject offices’. It is a segmented, immobile, frozen space. Each 
individual is fixed in his place. And, if he moves, he does so at the 
risk of his life, contagion or punishment. 

Inspection functions ceaselessly. The gaze is alert everywhere: ‘A 
considerable body of militia, commanded by good officers and men 


>95 




Discipline 


of substance’, guards at the gates, at the town hall and in every 
quarter to ensure the prompt obedience of the people and the most 
absolute authority of the magistrates, ‘as also to observe all disorder, 
