according to another version of the same fable, a society on the 
verge of dissolution and disappearance would have the right to erect 
scaffolds. The last crime cannot but remain unpunished. 

TTiis was an old view. The function of punishment as example 
was to be found long before the eighteenth-century reform. That 
punishment looks towards the future, and that at least one of its 
major functions is to prevent crime had, for centuries, been one of 
the current justifications of the right to punish. But the difference 
was that the prevention that was expected as an effect of the punish¬ 
ment and its spectacle - and therefore of its excess - tended now to 
become the principle of its economy and the measure of its just 
proportions. One must punish exactly enough to prevent repetition. 
There is, then, a shift in the mechanics of example: in a penality 
employing public torture and execution, example was the answer 
to the crime; it had, by a sort of twin manifestation, to show the 
crime and at the same time to show the sovereign power that 
mastered it; in a penality calculated according to its own effects, 
example must refer back to the crime, but in the most discreet way 
possible and with the greatest possible economy indicate the inter¬ 
vention of pbwer; ideally, too, it should prevent any subsequent 


93 




Punishment 


reappearance of either. The example is no longer a ritual that mani¬ 
fests; it is a sign that serves as an obstacle. Through this technique of 
punitive signs, which tends to reverse the whole temporal field of 
penal action, the reformers thought they were giving to the power 
to punish an economic, effective instrument that could be made 
general throughout the entire social body, capable of coding all its 
behaviour and consequently of reducing the whole diffuse domain 
of illegalities. The semio-technique with which one tried to arm the 
power to punish rested on five or six major rules. 

The rule of minimum quantity. A crime is committed because it 
procures certain advantages. If one linked, to the idea of crime, the 
idea of a slightly greater disadvantage, it would cease to be desir¬ 
able. ‘For punishment to produce the effect that must be expected of 
it, it is enough that the harm that it causes exceed the good that the 
criminal has derived from the crime’ (Beccaria, 89). A proximity 
between penalty and crime can, indeed must, be accepted; but no 
longer in its old form, where the public execution had to be equi¬ 
valent in intensity to the crime, with an additional factor that 
