— by a whole range of degrees of normality indicating membership 
of a homogeneous social body but also playing a part in classifica¬ 
tion, hierarchization and the distribution of rank. In a sense, the 
power of normalization imposes homogeneity; but it individualizes 
by making it possible to measure gaps, to determine levels, to fix 
specialities and to render the differences useful by fitting them one 
to another. It is easy to understand how the power of the norm 
functions within a system of formal equality, since within a homo¬ 
geneity that is the rule, the norm introduces, as a useful imperative 
and as a result of measurement, all the shading of individual 
differences. 


The examination 

The examination combines the techniques of an observing hierarchy 
and those of a normalizing judgement. It is a normalizing gaze, a 
surveillance that makes it possible to qualify, to classify and to 
punish. It establishes over individuals a visibility through which 
one differentiates them and judges them. That is why, in all the 
mechanisms of discipline, the examination is highly ritualized. In it 
are combined the ceremony of power and the form of the experi¬ 
ment, the deployment of force and the establishment of truth. At the 
heart of the procedures of discipline, it manifests the subjection of 


184 




The means of correct training 


those who are perceived as objects and the objectification of those 
who are subjected. The superimposition of the power relations and 
knowledge relations assumes in the examination all its visible 
brilliance. It is yet another innovation of the classical age that the 
historians of science have left unexplored. People write the history 
of experiments on those born blind, on wolf-children or under 
hypnosis. But who will write the more general, more fluid, but also 
more determinant history of the ‘examination’ - its rituals, its 
methods, its characters and their roles, its play of questions and 
answers, its systems of marking and classification.^ For in this 
slender technique are to be found a whole domain of knowledge, a 
whole type of power. One often speaks of the ideology that the 
human ‘sciences’ bring with them, in either discreet or prolix manner. 
But does their very technology, this tiny operational schema that 
has become so widespread (from psychiatry to pedagogy, from the 
diagnosis of diseases to the hiring of labour), this familiar method 
