him as it were, a wild fragment of nature; he appears as a villain, 
a monster, a madman, perhaps, a sick and, before long, ‘abnormal’ 
individual. It is as such that, one day, he will belong to a scientific 
objectification and to the ‘treatment’ that is correlative to it. On the 
other hand, the need to measure, from within, the effects of the 
punitive power prescribes tactics of intervention over all criminals, 
actual or potential; the organization of a field of prevention, the 
calculation of interests, the circulation of representations and signs, 
the constitution of a horizon of certainty and proof, the adjustment 
of penalties to ever more subtle variables; all this also leads to an 
objectification of criminals and crimes. In either case, one sees that 
the power relation that underlies the exercise of punishment begins 
to be duplicated by an object relation in which are caught up not 
only the crime as a fact to be established according to common 


lOI 



Punishment 


norms, but the criminal as an individual to be known according 
to specific criteria. One also sees that this object relation is not 
superimposed, from the outside, on the punitive practice, as would 
be a prohibition laid on the fury of the public execution by the 
limits of the sensibility, or as would be a rational or ‘scientific’ 
interrogation as to what this man that one is punishing really is. The 
processes of objectification originate in the very tactics of power and 
of the arrangement of its exercise. 

However, the two types of objectification that emerge with the 
project of penal reform are very different from one another: both in 
their chronology and in their effects. The objectification of the 
criminal as outside the law, as natural man, is still only a potentiality, 
a vanishing trace, in which are entangled the themes of political 
criticism and the figures of the imagination. One will have to wait a 
long time before homo criminalis becomes a definite object in the 
field of knowledge. The other, on the contrary, has had much more 
rapid and decisive effects in so far as it was linked more directly 
to the reorganization of the power to punish; codification, definition 
of offences, the fixing of a scale of penalties, rules of procedure, 
definition of the role of magistrates. And also because it made use 
of the discourse already constituted by the Ideologues. This discourse 
provided, in effect, by means of the theory of interests, representa¬ 
tions and signs, by the series and geneses that it reconstituted, a sort 
of general recipe for the exercise of power over men: the ‘mind’ as 
a surface of inscription for power, with semiology as its tool; the 
submission of bodies through the control of ideas; the analysis of 
