come about, the criminal must return to society’ (C. Lucas, quoted 
in the Gazette des tribunaux, 6 April 1837). 

The quality and content of detention should no longer be deter¬ 
mined by the nature of the offence alone. The juridical gravity of a 
crime does not at all have the value of a univocal sign for the 
character of the convict, whether or not he is capable of reform. In 
particular the crime-offence distinction, which the penal code 
recognized in drawing the corresponding distinction between mere 
imprisonment and imprisonment with hard labour, is not opera¬ 
tional in terms of reform. This was the almost universal opinion 
expressed by the directors of the maisons centrales, during an inquiry 
carried out by the ministry in 1836: ‘The minor offenders are gener¬ 
ally the most vicious. . . Among the criminals, one meets many 
men who have given in to the violence of their passions and to the 
needs of a large family.’ ‘The behaviour of criminals is much better 
than that of the minor offenders; the former are more submissive, 
harder-working than the latter, who, in general, are pickpockets, 
debauchees and idlers.’*' Hence the idea that punitive rigour must 
not be in direct proportion to the penal importance of the offence - 
nor determined once and for all. 

As an operation of correction, imprisonment has its own require¬ 
ments and dangers. It is its effects that must determine its stages, its 
temporary increases, its successive reductions, in severity; what 
Charles Lucas called the ‘mobile classification of moralities’. The 
progressive system applied at Geneva since 1825 was often advo¬ 
cated in France (Fresnel, 29-31). It took the form, for example, of 
three areas; a trial area for prisoners in general, a punishment area 
and a reward area for those who had embarked on the way of reform 
(Lucas, II, 440). Or it took the form of four phases: a period of 
intimidation (deprivation of work and of any internal or external 


245 




Prison 


relations); a period of work (isolation, but work which, after the 
phase of forced idleness, would be welcomed as a benefit); a regime 
of moralization (more or less frequent ‘lectures’ from the directors 
and official visitors); a period of work in common (Duras). Although 
the principle of the penalty was certainly a legal decision, its 
administration, its quality and its rigours must belong to an autono¬ 
mous mechanism that supervises the effects of punishment within the 
very apparatus that produces them. A whole regime of punishments 
