Witnesses who described the scene could even be prosecuted, there¬ 
by ensuring that the execution should cease to be a spectacle and 
remain a strange secret between the law and those it condemns. One 
has only to point out so many precautions to realize that capital 
punishment remains fundamentally, even today, a spectacle that 
must actually be forbidden. 

Similarly, the hold on the body did not entirely disappear in the 
mid-nineteenth century. Punishment had no doubt ceased to be 
centred on torture as a technique of pain; it assumed as its principal 
object loss of wealth or rights. But a punishment like forced labour 
or even imprisonment — mere loss of liberty - has never functioned 


15 




Torture 


without a certain additional element of punishment that certainly 
concerns the body itself: rationing of food, sexual deprivation, 
corporal punishment, solitary confinement. Are these the uninten¬ 
tional, but inevitable, consequence of imprisonment.^ In fact, in its 
most explicit practices, imprisonment has always involved a certain 
degree of physical pain. The criticism that was often levelled at the 
penitentiary system in the early nineteenth century (imprisonment 
is not a sufficient punishment: prisoners are less hungry, less cold, 
less deprived in general than many poor people or even workers) 
suggests a postulate that was never explicitly denied: it is just that a 
condemned man should suffer physically more than other men. It is 
difficult to dissociate punishment from additional physical pain. 
What would a non-corporal punishment be.^ 

There remains, therefore, a trace of ‘torture’ in the modern 
mechanisms of criminal justice — a trace that has not been entirely 
overcome, but which is enveloped, increasingly, by the non-corporal 
nature of the penal system. 

The reduction in penal severity in the last 200 years is a pheno¬ 
menon with which legal historians are well acquainted. But, for a 
long time, it has been regarded in an overall way as a quantitative 
phenomenon: less cruelty, less pain, more kindness, more respect, 
more ‘humanity’. In fact, these changes are accompanied by a dis¬ 
placement in the very object of the punitive operation. Is there a 
diminution of intensity.^ Perhaps. There is certainly a change of 
objective. 

