uninfluential, sets out to show that ‘the first thought of the American 
penitentiary system’ is ‘a quite monastic and French thought, whatever 
one might say by way of giving it a Genevan or Pennsylvanian 
origin’ (L. Faucher). 

9 Vilan XIV, 64; this memoir, which is bound up with the foundation of 
the prison at Ghent, remained unpublished until 1841. The frequency 
of the penalty of banishment emphasized still further the relations 
between crime and vagabondage. In 1771, the States of Flanders 
remarked that ‘penalties of banishment imposed on beggars remained 
ineffectual, in view of the fact that the States send to one another 
subjects that they find pernicious at home. As a result, a beggar, 
chased in this way from place to place, will finally get himself hanged, 
whereas, if he had been given the habit of work, he would not have 
embarked on his evil path’ (Stoobant, 228). 


313 



Notes 


10 The Quakers certainly also knew the Rasphuis and Spinhuis of 
Amsterdam. Cf. Sellin, 109-10. In any case, Walnut Street Prison was 
a continuation of the Almshouse opened in 1767 and of the penal 
legislation that the Quakers had wished to impose despite the English 
administration. 

11 On the disorders caused by this law, cf. Rush, 5-9 and Vaux, 4;. It 
should be noted that in the report by J. L. Siegel, which had inspired 
the Rasphuis of Amsterdam, it was envisaged that penalties would not 
be proclaimed publicly, that prisoners would be brought into the 
prison at night, that warders would swear not to reveal their identity 
and that no visits would be permitted (Sellin, 27-8). 

12 B. Rush, who was one of the inspectors, notes after a visit to Walnut 
Street: ‘Moral cares: preaching, reading of good books, cleanliness of 
clothes and rooms, baths; one does not raise one’s voice, little wine, 
as little tobacco as possible, little obscene or profane conversation. 
Constant work: the gardens taken care of; it is beautiful: 1,200 head of 
cabbage’ (in Teeters, 1935, 50). 

13 Rush, 14. This idea of an apparatus for transforming human beings 
is already to be found in Hanway’s project for a ‘reformatory’: ‘The 
idea of a hospital and that of a malefactor are incompatible; but let us 
try to make the prison an authentic and effective reformatory, instead 
of it being like the others a school of vice’ (Hanway, 52). 

