No doubt these protests, coming from such diverse sources, are 
directed not at imprisonment as a legal penalty, but at the ‘illegal’ 
use of arbitrary, indeterminate detention. Nevertheless, imprison¬ 
ment was seen, generally speaking, as branded by the abuses of 
power. And many cahiers de doUances rejected it as incompatible 
with good justice. Sometimes in the name of classical juridical 
principles: ‘Prisons were intended by the law not to punish but to 
secure the persons of the offenders...’ (Desjardin, 477). Sometimes 
in the name of the effects of imprisonment, which punishes those 
who have not yet been convicted, which communicates and general¬ 
izes the evil that it ought to prevent, and which runs counter to the 
principle of the individuality of penalties by punishing a whole 



Punishment 


family; it was said that ‘imprisonment is not a penalty. Humanity 
rises up against the frightful thought that it is not a punishment to 
deprive a citizen of his most precious possession, to plunge him 
ignominiously into the den of crime, to snatch him from everything 
that is dear to him, to bring him perhaps to ruin and to deprive not 
only him but his unfortunate family of all means of subsistence’ 
(Desjardin, 483). And, on several occasions, the cahiers demanded 
the abolition of those ‘houses of internment’: ‘We believe that the 
maisons de force must be razed to the ground. . And the decree 
of 13 March 1790 ordered the freeing of ‘all persons detained in 
castles, religious houses, maisons de force, maisons de police or any 
other prisons, by orders under the king’s private seal or by orders 
of the agents of the executive power’. 

How then could detention, so evidently bound up with an 
illegality that was denounced even in the power of the prince, 
become in so short a time one of the most general forms of legal 
punishment.^ 

The explanation most usually given is the formation, during the 
classical age, of a number of great models of punitive imprisonment. 
Their prestige, which was all the greater in that the most recent 
examples came from England and above all from America, appears 
to have made it possible to overcome the double obstacle constituted 
by the age-old rules of law and the despotic functioning of im¬ 
prisonment. Very soon, it seems, these obstacles were swept away 
by the punitive marvels thought up by the reformers, and detention 
became a serious reality. There can be no doubt about the importance 
of these models. But it is precisely these models that, before pro¬ 
viding a solution, themselves pose problems; the problem of their 
existence and the problem of their diffusion. How were they able 
to come into being and, above all, how did they become so generally 
accepted.^ For it is easy to show that, although they correspond on a 
number of points with the general principles of penal reform, they 
fail to do so on an even greater number; sometimes they are even 
quite incompatible. 

The oldest of these models, the one that is generally regarded as 
having more or less inspired all the others, was the Rasphuis of 
Amsterdam, opened in 1596.* Originally, it was intended for 


120 



The gentle way in punishment 


beggars or young malefactors. Its functioning obeyed three great 
principles: the duration of the penalties could, at least within 
certain limits, be determined by the administration itself, according 
to the prisoner’s conduct (indeed this latitude could be given in the 
sentence itself: in 1597 a prisoner was condemned to twelve years’ 
imprisonment, which could be reduced to eight, if his behaviour 
proved satisfactory). Work was obligatory; it was performed in 
common (indeed the individual cell was used only as an additional 
punishment; prisoners slept two or three to a bed, in cells containing 
between four and twelve persons); and, for the work done, the 
prisoners received wages. A strict time-table, a system of prohibi¬ 
tions and obligations, continual supervision, exhortations, religious 
readings, a whole complex of methods ‘to draw towards good’ and 
‘to turn away from evil’ held the prisoners in its grip from day to 
day. One may take the Rasphuis of Amsterdam as a basic figure. 
Historically, it forms the link between the theory, so characteristic 
of the sixteenth century, of a pedagogical and spiritual transforma¬ 
tion of individuals brought about by continuous exercise, and the 
penitentiary techniques conceived in the second half of the eighteenth 
century. And it provided the three institutions that were then set up 
with the fundamental principles that each was to develop in its own 
particular direction. 

The maison de force at Ghent organized penal labour above all 
around economic imperatives. The reason given was that idleness 
was the general cause of most crimes. An investigation - no doubt 
one of the first - carried out among those sentenced under the 
jurisdiction of Alost, in 1749, showed that malefactors were not 
‘artisans or labourers’ (workers think only of the work that feeds 
them), but ‘idlers given up to begging’.® Hence the idea of a house 
that would in a sense provide a universal pedagogy of work for 
those who had proved to be resistant to it. This had four advantages: 
it reduced the number of criminal prosecutions, which were costly 
