day ‘justice’ was meted out in the parlour: ‘The least act of dis¬ 
obedience is punished and the best way of avoiding serious offences 
is to punish the most minor offences very severely: at Mettray, a use¬ 
less word is punishable’; the principal punishment inflicted was 
confinement to one’s cell; for ‘isolation is the best means of acting on 
the moral nature of children; it is there above all that the voice of 
religion, even if it has never spoken to their hearts, recovers all its 
emotional power’ - Ducpetiaux, 1852, 377); the entire parapenal 
institution, which is created in order not to be a prison, culminates 
in the cell, on the walls of which are written in black letters: ‘God 
sees you.’ 

This superimposition of different models makes it possible to 
indicate, in its specific features, the function of ‘training’. The chiefs 
and their deputies at Mettray had to be not exactly judges, or 
teachers, or foremen, or non-commissioned officers, or ‘parents’, 
but something of all these things in a quite specific mode of inter¬ 
vention. They were in a sense technicians of behaviour: engineers 
of conduct, orthopaedists of individuality. Their task was to produce 
bodies that were both docile and capable; they supervised the nine 
or ten working hours of every day (whether in a workshop or in 
the fields); they directed the orderly movements of groups of in¬ 
mates, physical exercises, military exercises, rising in the morning, 
going to bed at night, walks to the accompaniment of bugle and 
whistle; they taught gymnastics;* they checked cleanliness, super¬ 
vised bathing. Training was accompanied by permanent observa¬ 
tion; a body of knowledge was being constantly built up from the 
everyday behaviour of the inmates; it was organized as an instrument 
of perpetual assessment: ‘On entering the colony, the child is sub¬ 
jected to a sort of interrogation as to his origins, the position of his 
family, the offence for which he was brought before the courts and 
all the other offences that make up his short and often very sad 
existence. This information is written down on a board on which 
everything concerning each inmate is noted in turn, his stay at the 
colony and the place to which he is sent when he leaves’ (Ducpeti¬ 
aux, 1851, 61). The modelling of the body produces a knowledge 
of the individual, the apprenticeship of the techniques induces modes 
of behaviour and the acquisition of skills is inextricably linked with 


294 



The carceral 


the establishment of power relations; strong, skilled agricultural 
workers are produced; in this very work, provided it is technically 
supervised, submissive subjects are produced and a dependable 
body of knowledge built up about them. This disciplinary technique 
exercised upon the body had a double effect: a ‘soul’ to be known 
and a subjection to be maintained. One result vindicated this work of 
training: in 1848, at a moment when ‘the fever of revolution fired the 
imagination of all, when the schools at Angers, La Fl^che, Alfort, 
even the boarding schools, rose up in rebellion, the inmates of 
Mettray were calmer than ever’ (Ferrus). 

Where Mettray was especially exemplary was in the specificity 
that it recognized in this operation of training. It was related to 
other forms of supervision, on which it was based: medicine, general 
education, religious direction. But it cannot not be identified abso¬ 
lutely with them. Nor with administration in the strict sense. Heads 
or deputy-heads of ‘families’, monitors and foremen, had to live in 
close proximity to the inmates; their clothes were ‘almost as humble’ 
as those of the inmates themselves; they practically never left their 
side, observing them day and night; they constituted among them 
a network of permanent observation. And, in order to train them 
themselves, a specialized school had been organized in the colony. 
The essential element of its programme was to subject the future 
cadres to the same apprenticeships and to the same coercions as the 
inmates themselves: they were ‘subjected as pupils to the discipline 
that, later, as instructors, they would themselves impose’. They were 
taught the art of power relations. It was the first training college in 
pure discipline: the ‘penitentiary’ was not simply a project that 
sought its justification in ‘humanity’ or its foundations in a ‘science’, 
but a technique that was learnt, transmitted and which obeyed 
general norms. The practice that normalized by compulsion the 
conduct of the undisciplined or dangerous could, in turn, by 
technical elaboration and rational reflection, be ‘normalized’. The 
disciplinary technique became a ‘discipline’ which also had its 
school. 

It so happens that historians of the human sciences date the birth 
of scientific psychology at this time: during these same years, it 
seems, Weber was manipulating his little compass for the measure¬ 
ment of sensations. What took place at Mettray (and in other 


295 



Prison 


European countries sooner or later) was obviously of a quite differ¬ 
ent order. It was the emergence or rather the institutional specifica¬ 
tion, the baptism as it were, of a new type of supervision - both 
knowledge and power - over individuals who resisted disciplinary 
