theft and extortion’. At each of the town gates there will be an 
observation postj at the end of each street sentinels. Every day, the 
intendant visits the quarter in his charge, inquires whether the 
syndics have carried out their tasks, whether the inhabitants have 
anything to complain of; they ‘observe their actions’. Every day, 
too, the syndic goes into the street for which he is responsible; 
stops before each house: gets all the inhabitants to appear at the 
windows (those who live overlooking the courtyard will be allo¬ 
cated a window looking onto the street at which no one but they 
may show themselves); he calls each of them by name; informs 
himself as to the state of each and every one of them — ‘in which 
respect the inhabitants will be compelled to speak the truth under 
pain of death’; if someone does not appear at the window, the syndic 
must ask why: ‘In this way he will find out easily enough whether 
dead or sick are being concealed.’ Everyone locked up in his 
cage, everyone at his window, answering to his name and showing 
himself when asked - it is the great review of the living and the 
dead. 

This surveillance is based on a system of permanent registration: 
reports from the syndics to the intendants, from the intendants to 
the magistrates or mayor. At the beginning of the ‘lock up’, the role 
of each of the inhabitants present in the town is laid down, one by 
one; this document bears ‘the name, age, sex of everyone, notwith¬ 
standing his condition’: a copy is sent to the intendant of the quarter, 
another to the office of the town hall, another to enable the syndic 
to make his daily roll call. Everything that may be observed during 
the course of the visits - deaths, illnesses, complaints, irregularities - 
is noted down and transmitted to the intendants and magistrates. 
The magistrates have complete control over medical treatment; they 
have appointed a physician in charge; no other practitioner may 
treat, no apothecary prepare medicine, no confessor visit a sick 
person without having received from him a written note ‘to prevent 
anyone from concealing and dealing with those sick of the contagion, 
unknown to the magistrates’. The registration of the pathological 
must be constantly centralized. The relation of each individual to his 


196 




Panopticism 


disease and to his death passes through the representatives of power, 
the registration they make of it, the decisions they take on it. 

Five or six days after the beginning of the quarantine, the process 
of purifying the houses one by one is begun. All the inhabitants are 
made to leave; in each room ‘the furniture and goods’ are raised 
from the ground or suspended from the air; perfume is poured 
around the room; after carefully sealing the windows, doors and 
even the keyholes with wax, the perfume is set alight. Finally, the 
entire house is closed while the perfume is consumed; those who 
have carried out the work are searched, as they were on entry, ‘in 
the presence of the residents of the house, to see that they did not 
have something on their persons as they left that they did not have 
on entering’. Four hours later, the residents are allowed to re-enter 
their homes. 

This enclosed, segmented space, observed at every point, in 
which the individuals are inserted in a fixed place, in which the 
slightest movements are supervised, in which all events are recorded, 
in which an uninterrupted work of writing links the centre and 
periphery, in which power is exercised without division, according 
to a continuous hierarchical figure, in which each individual is con¬ 
stantly located, examined and distributed among the living beings, 
the sick and the dead - all this constitutes a compact model of the 
disciplinary mechanism. The plague is met by order; its function is 
to sort out every possible confusion: that of the disease, which is 
transmitted when bodies are mixed together; that of the evil, which 
is increased when fear and death overcome prohibitions. It lays 
down for each individual his place, his body, his disease and his 
death, his well-being, by means of an omnipresent and omniscient 
power that subdivides itself in a regular, uninterrupted way even 
to the ultimate determination of the individual, of what characterizes 
him, of what belongs to him, of what happens to him. Against the 
plague, which is a mixture, discipline brings into play its power, 
which is one of analysis. A whole literary fiction of the festival grew 
up around the plague: suspended laws, lifted prohibitions, the 
frenzy of passing time, bodies mingling together without respect, 
individuals unmasked, abandoning their statutory identity and the 
figure under which they had been recognized, allowing a quite 
different truth to appear. But there was also a political dream of the 


197 



Discipline 


plague, which was exactly its reverse: not the collective festival, 
but strict divisions; not laws transgressed, but the penetration of 
regulation into even the smallest details of everyday life through the 
mediation of the complete hierarchy that assured the capillary func¬ 
tioning of power; not masks that were put on and taken off, but the 
