corporals, anspessades, lance-corporals. . . The lance-corporals will 
be exercised every Sunday by the head of the section ...; the cor¬ 
porals and anspessades will be exercised every Tuesday afternoon 
by the sergeants and their company and these in turn on the after¬ 
noons of every second, twelfth and twenty-second day of each 
month by senior officers’ {Instruction _). 

It is this disciplinary time that was gradually imposed on peda¬ 
gogical practice - specializing the time of training and detaching it 
from the adult time, from the time of mastery; arranging different 
stages, separated from one another by graded examinations; drawing 
up programmes, each of which must take place during a particular 
stage and which involves exercises of increasing difficulty; qualifying 
individuals according to the way in which they progress through 
these series. For the ‘initiatory’ time of traditional training (an over¬ 
all time, supervised by the master alone, authorized by a single 
examination), disciplinary time had substituted its multiple and 
progressive series. A whole analytical pedagogy was being formed, 
meticulous in its detail (it broke down the subject being taught into 
its simplest elements, it hierarchized each stage of development into 
small steps) and also very precocious in its history (it largely antici¬ 
pated the genetic analyses of the ideologues, whose technical model 
it appears to have been). At the beginning of the eighteenth century, 
Demia suggested a division of the process of learning to read into 
seven levels: the first for those who are beginning to learn the letters, 
the second for those who are learning to spell, the third for those 
who are learning to join syllables together to make words, the 
fourth for those who are reading Latin in sentences or from punc¬ 
tuation to punctuation, the fifth for those who are beginning to read 
French, the sixth for the best readers, the seventh for those who can 
read manuscripts. But, where there are a great many pupils, further 
subdivisions would have to be introduced; the first class would 
comprise four streams: one for those who are learning the ‘simple 
letters’; a second for those who are learning the ‘mixed’ letters; a 


159 




Discipline 


third for those who are learning the abbreviated letters (d, e ...); 
a fourth for those who are learning the double letters (^ff, ss, tt, st). 
The second class would be divided into three streams: for those who 
‘count each letter aloud before spelling the syllable, Z?. 0 ., DO'-, for 
those ‘who spell the most difficult syllables, such as bant, brand, 
spinx', etc. (Demia, 19-20). Each stage in the combinatory of el¬ 
