has received little attention. It is regarded as not much more than a 


224 



Panopticism 


bizarre little utopia, a perverse dream - rather as though Bentham 
had been the Fourier of a police society, and the Phalanstery had 
taken on the form of the Panopticon. And yet this represented the 
abstract formula of a very real technology, that of individuals. 
There were many reasons why it received little praise; the most 
obvious is that the discourses to which it gave rise rarely acquired, 
except in the academic classifications, the status of sciences; but the 
real reason is no doubt that the power that it operates and which it 
augments is a direct, physical power that men exercise upon one 
another. An inglorious culmination had an origin that could be 
only grudgingly acknowledged. But it would be unjust to compare 
the disciplinary techniques with such inventions as the steam engine 
or Amici’s microscope. They are much less; and yet, in a way, they 
are much more. If a historical equivalent or at least a point of 
comparison had to be found for them, it would be rather in the 
‘inquisitorial’ technique. 

The eighteenth century invented the techniques of discipline and 
the examination, rather as the Middle Ages invented the judicial 
investigation. But it did so by quite different means. The investiga¬ 
tion procedure, an old fiscal and administrative technique, had 
developed above all with the reorganization of the Church and the 
increase of the princely states in the twelfth and thirteenth cen¬ 
turies. At this time it permeated to a very large degree the juris¬ 
prudence first of the ecclesiastical courts, then of the lay courts. 
The investigation as an authoritarian search for a truth observed 
or attested was thus opposed to the old procedures of the oath, 
the ordeal, the judicial duel, the judgement of God or even of the 
transaction between private individuals. The investigation was the 
sovereign power arrogating to itself the right to establish the truth 
by a number of regulated techniques. Now, although the investiga¬ 
tion has since then been an integral part of western justice (even up 
to our own day), one must not foi^et either its political origin, its 
link with the birth of the states and of monarchical sovereignty, or 
its later extension and its role in the formation, of knowledge. In 
fact, the investigation has been the no doubt crude, but fundamental 
element in the constitution of the empirical sciences; it has been the 
juridico-political matrix of this experimental knowledge, which, as 
we know, was very rapidly released at the end of the Middle Ages. 




Discipline 


It is perhaps true to say that, in Greece, mathematics were bom 
from techniques of measurement; the sciences of nature, in any case, 
were born, to some extent, at the end of the Middle Ages, from the 
practices of investigation. The great empirical knowledge that 
covered the things of the world and transcribed them into the 
ordering of an indefinite discourse that observes, describes and 
establishes the ‘facts’ (at a time when the western world was begin¬ 
ning the economic and political conquest of this same world) had 
its operating model no doubt in the Inquisition - that immense 
invention that our recent mildness has placed in the dark recesses 
of our memory. But what this politico-juridical, administrative and 
criminal, religious and lay, investigation was to the sciences of 
nature, disciplinary analysis has been to the sciences of man. These 
sciences, which have so delighted our ‘humanity’ for over a century, 
have their technical matrix in the petty, malicious minutiae of the 
disciplines and their investigations. These investigations are perhaps 
to psychology, psychiatry, pedagogy, criminology, and so many 
other strange sciences, what the terrible power of investigation was 
to the calm knowledge of the animals, the plants or the earth. 
Another power, another knowledge. On the threshold of the classi¬ 
cal age. Bacon, lawyer and statesman, tried to develop a methodology 
of investigation for the empirical sciences. What Great Observer 
will produce the methodology of examination for the human 
sciences.^ Unless, of course, such a thing is not possible. For, 
although it is true that, in becoming a technique for the empirical 
sciences, the investigation has detached itself from the inquisitorial 
procedure, in which it was historically rooted, the examination has 
remained extremely close to the disciplinary power that shaped it. 
It has always been and still is an intrinsic element of the disciplines. 
Of course it seems to have undergone a speculative purification by 
integrating itself with such sciences as psychology and psychiatry. 
And, in effect, its appearance in the form of tests, interviews, 
interrogations and consultations is apparently in order to rectify 
the mechanisms of discipline: educational psychology is supposed to 
correct the rigours of the school, just as the medical or psychiatric 
interview is supposed to rectify the effects of the discipline of work. 
But we must not be misled; these techniques merely refer individuals 
from one disciplinary authority to another, and they reproduce, in 


226 



