a particular classification or for his movement from one to another. 
He is a veritable accountant. Each inmate is for him, in the sphere 
of individual education, a capital invested with penitentiary interest’ 
(Lucas, II, 449-50). As a highly efficient technology, penitentiary 
practice produces a return on the capital invested in the penal system 
and in the building of heavy prisons. 

Similarly, the offender becomes an individual to know. This 
demand for knowledge was not, in the first instance, inserted into 
the legislation itself, in order to provide substance for the sentence 
and to determine the true degree of guilt. It is as a convict, as a point 
of application for punitive mechanisms, that the offender is con¬ 
stituted himself as the object of possible knowledge. 

But this implies that the penitentiary apparatus, with the whole 
technological programme that accompanies it, brings about a 
curious substitution: from the hands of justice, it certainly receives 
a convicted person; but what it must apply itself to is not, of course, 
the offence, nor even exactly the offender, but a rather different 
object, one defined by variables which at the outset at least were not 
taken into account in the sentence, for they were relevant only for 
a corrective technology. This other character, whom the peniten¬ 
tiary apparatus substitutes for the convicted offender, is the 
delinquent. 

The delinquent is to be distinguished from the offender by the 
fact that it is not so much his act as his life that is relevant in char¬ 
acterizing him. The penitentiary operation, if it is to be a genuine 
re-education, must become the sum total existence of the delinquent, 
making of the prison a sort of artificial and coercive theatre in which 


251 




Prison 


his life will be examined from top to bottom. The legal punishment 
bears upon an act; the punitive technique on a life; it falls to this 
punitive technique, therefore, to reconstitute all the sordid detail of 
a life in the form of knowledge, to fill in the gaps of that knowledge 
and to act upon it by a practice of compulsion. It is a biographical 
knowledge and a technique for correcting individual lives. The 
observation of the delinquent ‘should go back not only to the 
circumstances, but also to the causes of his crime; they must be 
sought in the story of his life, from the triple point of view of 
psychology, social position and upbringing, in order to discover the 
