Thorez, who commanded the chain-gang of 19 July, wished to 
remove these ornaments: ‘It is not fitting that, as you go to the convict- 
ship to expiate your crimes, you should push effrontery so far as to 
decorate your hair, as if you were going to your wedding.’ 

5 Revue de Paris, 7 June 1836. On this date, the chain-gang had been 
shortened in order to prevent this merry-go-round and soldiers had 
been commanded to maintain order up to the departure of the chain- 
gang. The convicts’ Sabbath is described in the Dernier jour d’un 
condamne: ‘Society was represented there by the gaolers and the horri¬ 
fied and curious bystanders. The criminal defined the intentions of 
society and made of this horrible punishment a family festival.’ 


320 




Notes 


6 A song of the same kind is quoted by the Gcqette des tribunaux of 
10 April 1836. It was sung to the tune of the ‘Marseillaise’. The 
patriotic war song clearly became the song of the social war: ‘What do 
these stupid people want of us, do they come to insult us in our mis¬ 
fortune.^ They stare at us calmly. Our butchers do not horrify them.’ 

7 There is a class of writers who ‘have striven to glorify the crimes of 
certain exceptionally skilled malefactors, give them the leading roles 
and expose the agents of authority to their sallies, their jeers and their 
ill-disguised mockery. Whoever has seen a performance oiAuberge des 
Adrets or Robert Macaire, a drama celebrated among the people, will 
recognize without difficulty the correctness of my observations. It is 
the triumph, the apotheosis, of audacity and crime. Honest folk and 
the forces of public order are ridiculed from beginning to end’ (Fregier, 
II, 187-8). 

8 Gaiette des tribunaux, 23 July 1837. On 9 August, the Gaiette reported 
that the carriage had overturned on the outskirts of Guingamp: 
instead of mutinying, the prisoners, ‘helped their guardians to put 
their common vehicle back on its wheels’. Yet on 30 October, it noted 
an escape at Valence. 

9 Text addressed to L’Atelier, October 1842, by a worker imprisoned 
for joining a workers’ association. It was able to note this protest at a 
time when the same newspaper was waging a campaign against com¬ 
petition from penal labour. The same issue carried a letter from another 
worker on the same subject. Cf. also La Fraterniti, March 1842, 
1st year, no. 10. 
