definitively and everywhere; hence the persistence in regarding them 
as the humble, but concrete form of every morality, whereas they 
are a set of physico-political techniques. 


223 


Discipline 


To return to the problem of legal punishments, the prison witli 
all the corrective technology at its disposal is to be resituated at the 
point where the codified power to punish turns into a disciplinary 
power to observe; at the point where the universal punishments of 
the law are applied selectively to certain individuals and always the 
same ones; at the point where the redefinition of the juridical subject 
by the penalty becomes a useful training of the criminal; at the point 
where the law is inverted and passes outside itself, and where the 
counter-law becomes the effective and institutionalized content of 
the juridical forms. What generalizes the power to punish, then, is 
not the universal consciousness of the law in each juridical subject; 
it is the regular extension, the infinitely minute web of panoptic 
techniques. 

3. Taken one by one, most of these techniques have a long 
history behind them. But what was new, in the eighteenth century, 
was that, by being combined and generalized, they attained a level 
at which the formation of knowledge and the increase of power 
regularly reinforce one another in a circular process. At this point, 
the disciplines crossed the ‘technological’ threshold. First the 
hospital, then the school, then, later, the workshop were not sim¬ 
ply ‘reordered’ by the disciplines; they became, thanks to them, 
apparatuses such that any mechanism of objectification could be 
used in them as an instrument of subjection, and any growth of 
power could give rise in them to possible branches of knowledge; 
it was this link, proper to the technological systems, that made 
possible within the disciplinary element the formation of clinical 
medicine, psychiatry, child psychology, educational psychology, 
the rationalization of labour. It is a double process, then: an episte¬ 
mological ‘thaw’ through a refinement of power relations; a 
multiplication of the effects of power through the formation 
and accumulation of new forms of knowledge. 

The extension of the disciplinary methods is inscribed in a broad 
historical process: the development at about the same time of many 
other technologies - agronomical, industrial, economic. But it must 
be recognized that, compared with the mining industries, the 
emerging chemical industries or methods of national accountancy, 
compared with the blast furnaces or the steam engine, panopticism 
