slaves, or represent them to themselves, the pains they bear are 
concentrated into a single idea; all the moments of slavery are 
contracted into a representation that then becomes more terrifying 
than the idea of death. It is the economically ideal punishment: it 
is minimal for him who undergoes it (and who, reduced to slavery, 
cannot repeat his crime) and it is maximal for him who represents it 
to himself. ‘Among the penalties, and in the way of applying them 
in proportion to the offences, one must choose the means that will 
leave the most lasting impression on the minds of the people, and 
the least cruel on the body of the criminal’ (Beccaria, 87). 

The rule of perfect certainty. With the idea of each crime and the 
advantages to be expected of it must be associated the idea of a 
particular punishment with the precise inconveniences that result 
from it; the link from one to the other must be regarded as necessary 
and unbreakable. This general element of certainty that must give 
the system of punishment its effectiveness involves a number of 
precise measures. The laws that define the crime and lay down the 
penalties must be perfectly clear, ‘so that each member of society 
may distinguish criminal actions from virtuous actions’ (Brissot, 
24). These laws must be published, so that everyone has access to 


95 




Punishment 


them; what is needed is not oral traditions and customs, but a written 
legislation which can be ‘the stable monument of the social pact’, 
printed texts available to all: ‘Only printing can make the public as 
a whole and not just a few persons depositories of the sacred code of 
the laws’ (Beccaria, 26). The monarch must renounce his right of 
pardon so that the force that is present in the idea of punishment 
is not attenuated by the hope of intervention: ‘If one allows men to 
see that the crime may be pardoned and that punishment is not a 
necessary consequence of it, one nourishes in them the hope of 
going unpunished. . . The laws must be inexorable, those who 
execute them inflexible.’® Above all, no crime committed must 
escape the gaze of those whose task it is to dispense justice. Nothing 
so weakens the machinery of the law than the hope of going un¬ 
punished; how could one establish in the minds of the public a strict 
link between the offence and a penalty if it were affected by a certain 
coefficient of improbability.^ Would it not be necessary to make the 
penalty the more to be feared in its violence as it is less to be feared 
in its uncertainty.^ Rather than imitate the old system in this way 
and be ‘more severe, one must be more vigilant’.’" Hence the idea 
