strained in the same way or with the same insistence when they 
begin to improve; the punishment should diminish as it produces its 
effects. It may well be fixed, in the sense that it is determined for all, 
in the same way, by law, but its internal mechanism must be variable. 
In the bill put before the Constituent Assembly, Le Peletier pro¬ 
posed a system of diminishing penalties: a convict condemned to 
the most serious penalty would be subjected to the 'cachot' (manacles 
on hands and feet, darkness, solitude, bread and water) only during 
the first stage of his imprisonment; he would be allowed to work 
first two then three days a week. After two thirds of his sentence 
had been served, he could pass to the ‘gene' (a cell with light, chain 
around the waist, solitary work for five hours a day, but with other 
prisoners on the other two days; this work would be paid and would 
enable him to improve his daily fare). Lastly, when he approached 
the end of his sentence, he could pass to the normal prison regime: 
‘He will be allowed every day to meet other prisoners for work in 
common. If he prefers, he will be able to work alone. He will pay 
for his food from what he earns from his work’ (Le Peletier, 329-30). 

4. For the convict, the penalty is a mechanics of signs, interests 
and duration. But the guilty person is only one of the targets of 
punishment. For punishment is directed above all at others, at all 
the potentially guilty. So these obstacle-signs that are gradually 
engraved in the representation of the condemned man must there¬ 
fore circulate rapidly and widely; they must be accepted and redis¬ 
tributed by all; they must shape the discourse that each individual 
has with others and by which crime is forbidden to all by all - the 
true coin that is substituted in people’s minds for the false profits of 
crime. 


108 



The gentle way in punishment 


For this, everyone must see punishment not only as natural, but 
in his own interest; everyone must be able to read in it his own 
advantage. There must be no more spectacular, but useless penalties. 
There must be no secret penalties either; but punishment must be 
regarded as a retribution that the guilty man makes to each of his 
fellow citizens, for the crime that has wronged them all - penalties 
that are constantl}- placed before citizens’ eyes, and which ‘bring out 
the public utility of common and particular movements’ (Dufriche 
de Valaze, 346). The ideal would be for the convict to appear as a 
sort of rentable property: a slave at the service of all. Why would 
society eliminate a life and a body that it could appropriate.^ If 
would be more useful to make him ‘serve the state in a slavery 
