right and the exclusive power of the sovereign and his judges. 
Ayrault supposed that this procedure (which was more or less 
established by the sixteenth century) originated in ‘the fear of the 


35 




Torture 


uproar, shouting and cheering that the people usually indulge in, 
the fear that there would be disorder, violence, and outbursts against 
the parties, or even against the judges’; the king wished to show in 
this that the ‘sovereign power’ from which the right to punish 
derived could in no case belong to the ‘multitude’ (cf. Ayrault, 
LIII, chapters LXXII and LXIX). Before the justice of the sover¬ 
eign, all voices must be still. 

Yet, despite the use of secrecy, certain rules had to be obeyed in 
establishing the truth. Secrecy itself required that a rigorous model 
of penal truth be defined. A whole tradition dating from the Middle 
Ages and considerably developed by the great lawyers of the 
Renaissance laid down what the nature and the use of evidence 
might be. Even in the eighteenth century, it was still common to 
meet distinctions like the following: true, direct, or legitimate proof 
(that provided by witnesses, for example) and indirect, conjeictural, 
artificial proof (obtained by argument); or, again, manifest proof, 
considerable proof, imperfect or slight (Jousse, 660); or, again, 
‘urgent or necessary’ proof that did not allow one to doubt the 
truth of the deed (this was ‘full’ proof: thus two irreproachable wit¬ 
nesses affirming that they saw the accused, carrying an unsheathed 
and bloody sword, leave the place where, some time later, the body 
of the dead man was found with stab wounds); approximate or semi¬ 
full proof, which may be regarded as true as long as the accused does 
not destroy it with evidence to the contrary (the evidence of a single 
eye-witness or death threats preceding a murder); lastly, distant or 
'adminicule' clues, which consisted only of opinion (rumour, the 
flight of the suspect, his manner when questioned, etc. - Muyart de 
Vouglans, 1757, 345-7)- Now, these distinctions are not simply 
theoretical subtleties. They have an operational function. First, 
because each of these kinds of evidence, taken in isolation, may have 
a particular type of judicial effect: ‘full’ proof may lead to any 
sentence; ‘semi-full’ proof may lead to any of the 'peines afflictives’, 
or heavy penalties, except death; imperfect and slight clues are 
enough for the suspect to have a writ issued against him, to have 
the case deferred for further inquiry or to have a fine imposed on 
him. Secondly, because they are combined according to precise 
arithmetical rules: two ‘semi-full’ proofs may make a complete proof; 
‘adminicuhs’, providing there are several of them and they concur. 


36 




The spectacle of the scaffold 


may be combined to form a semi-proof; but, however many there 
may be of them, they can never, of themselves, constitute a complete 
proof. We have, then, a penal arithmetic that is meticulous on many 
points, but which still leaves a margin for a good deal of argument; in 
order for a capital sentence to be passed, is a single full proof enough 
or must it be accompanied by other slighter clues.^ Are two approxi¬ 
mate proofs always equivalent to a full proof Should not three be 
required or two plus distant clues.^ Are there elements that may be 
regarded as clues only for certain crimes, in certain circumstances 
and in relation to certain persons (thus evidence is disregarded if it 
comes from a vagabond; it is reinforced, on the contrary, if it is 
provided by ‘a considerable person’ or by a master in the case of a 
domestic offence). It is an arithmetic modulated by casuistry, whose 
function is to define how a legal proof is to be constructed. On the 
one hand, this system of ‘legal proofs’ makes truth in the penal 
domain the result of a complex art; it obeys rules known only to 
specialists, and, consequently, it reinforces the principle of secrecy. 
‘It is not enough that the judge should have the conviction that any 
reasonable man may have. . . Nothing is more incorrect than this 
way of judging, which, in truth, is no other than a more or less well- 
founded opinion.’ But, on the other hand, it is a severe constraint 
for the magistrate; in the absence of this regularity, ‘every sentence 
would be reckless, and in a sense it may be said that it is unjust even 
when, in truth, the accused is guilty’ (Poullain du Parc, 112-13 ~ see 
also Esmein, 260-83 Mittermaier, 15-19). The day will come 
when the singularity of this judicial truth will appear scandalous; 
as if the law did not have to obey the rules of common truth. ‘What 
would be said of a semi-proof in the sciences capable of demonstra¬ 
tion.^ What would a geometrical or algebraic semi-proof amount 
to.^’ (Seigneux de Correvon, 63). But it should not be forgotten 
that these formal constraints on legal proof were a mode of regula¬ 
tion internal to absolute power and exclusive of knowledge. 

Written, secret, subjected, in order to construct its proofs, to 
rigorous rules, the penal investigation was a machine that might 
produce the truth in the absence of the accused. And by this very 
fact, though the law strictly speaking did not require it, this pro¬ 
cedure was to tend necessarily to the confession. And for two 
