accepted.^ For it is easy to show that, although they correspond on a 
number of points with the general principles of penal reform, they 
fail to do so on an even greater number; sometimes they are even 
quite incompatible. 

The oldest of these models, the one that is generally regarded as 
having more or less inspired all the others, was the Rasphuis of 
Amsterdam, opened in 1596.* Originally, it was intended for 


120 



The gentle way in punishment 


beggars or young malefactors. Its functioning obeyed three great 
principles: the duration of the penalties could, at least within 
certain limits, be determined by the administration itself, according 
to the prisoner’s conduct (indeed this latitude could be given in the 
sentence itself: in 1597 a prisoner was condemned to twelve years’ 
imprisonment, which could be reduced to eight, if his behaviour 
proved satisfactory). Work was obligatory; it was performed in 
common (indeed the individual cell was used only as an additional 
punishment; prisoners slept two or three to a bed, in cells containing 
between four and twelve persons); and, for the work done, the 
prisoners received wages. A strict time-table, a system of prohibi¬ 
tions and obligations, continual supervision, exhortations, religious 
readings, a whole complex of methods ‘to draw towards good’ and 
‘to turn away from evil’ held the prisoners in its grip from day to 
day. One may take the Rasphuis of Amsterdam as a basic figure. 
Historically, it forms the link between the theory, so characteristic 
of the sixteenth century, of a pedagogical and spiritual transforma¬ 
tion of individuals brought about by continuous exercise, and the 
penitentiary techniques conceived in the second half of the eighteenth 
century. And it provided the three institutions that were then set up 
with the fundamental principles that each was to develop in its own 
particular direction. 

The maison de force at Ghent organized penal labour above all 
around economic imperatives. The reason given was that idleness 
was the general cause of most crimes. An investigation - no doubt 
one of the first - carried out among those sentenced under the 
jurisdiction of Alost, in 1749, showed that malefactors were not 
‘artisans or labourers’ (workers think only of the work that feeds 
them), but ‘idlers given up to begging’.® Hence the idea of a house 
that would in a sense provide a universal pedagogy of work for 
those who had proved to be resistant to it. This had four advantages: 
it reduced the number of criminal prosecutions, which were costly 
