‘capacity’, which it seeks to increase; on the other hand, it reverses 
the course of the energy, the power that might result from it, and 
turns it into a relation of strict subjection. If economic exploit¬ 
ation separates the force and the product of labour, let us say 
that disciplinary coercion establishes in the body the con¬ 
stricting link between an increased aptitude and an increased 
domination. 

The ‘invention’ of this new political anatomy must not be seen 
as a sudden discovery. It is rather a multiplicity of often minor 
processes, of different origin and scattered location, which overlap, 
repeat, or imitate one another, support one another, distinguish 
themselves from one another according to their domain of applica¬ 
tion, converge and gradually produce the blueprint of a general 
method. They were at work in secondary education at a very early 
date, later in primary schools; they slowly invested the space of the 
hospital; and, in a few decades, they restructured the military 
organization. They sometimes circulated very rapidly from one 
point to another (between the army and the technical schools or 
secondary schools), sometimes slowly and discreetly (the insidious 
militarization of the large workshops). On almost every occasion, 
they were adopted in response to particular needs: an industrial 
innovation, a renewed outbreak of certain epidemic diseases, the 
invention of the rifle or the victories of Prussia. This did not prevent 


138 



Docile bodies 


them being totally inscribed in general and essential transforma¬ 
tions, which we must now try to delineate. 

There can be no question here of writing the history of the 
different disciplinary institutions, with all their individual differ¬ 
ences. I simply intend to map on a series of examples some of the 
essential techniques that most easily spread from one to another. 
These were always meticulous, often minute, techniques, but they 
had their importance: because they defined a certain mode of 
detailed political investment of the body, a ‘new micro-physics’ of 
power; and because, since the seventeenth century, they had con¬ 
stantly reached out to ever broader domains, as if they tended to 
cover the entire social body. Small acts of cunning endowed with a 
great power of diffusion, subtle arrangements, apparently innocent, 
but profoundly suspicious, mechanisms that obeyed economies too 
shameful to be acknowledged, or pursued petty forms of coercion - 
it was nevertheless they that brought about the mutation of the 
