No doubt something of the old public execution was, for a time, 
superimposed in France on the sobriety of the new method. Parri¬ 
cides - and the regicides who were regarded as such - were led to 
the scaffold wearing a black veil; there, until 1832, one of their 
hands was cut off. Thereafter, nothing remained but the ornamental 
crepe. Thus it was in the case of Fieschi, the would-be assassin of 
Louis-Philippe, in November 1836: ‘He will be taken to the place 
of execution wearing a shirt, barefoot, his head covered with a black 
veil; he will be exhibited upon a scaffold while an usher reads the 
sentence to the people, and he will be immediately executed.’ We 
should remember Damiens - and note that the last addition to penal 
death was a mourning veil. The condemned man was no longer to 
be seen. Only the reading of the sentence on the scaffold announced 


13 




Torture 


the crime - and that crime must be faceless. (The more monstrous a 
criminal was, the more he must be deprived of light: he must not see, 
or be seen. This was a common enough notion at the time. For the 
parricide one should ‘construct an iron cage or dig an impenetrable 
dungeon that would serve him as an eternal retreat’ - De Molene, 
275-7-) The last vestige of the great public execution was its annul¬ 
ment: a drapery to hide a body. Benoit, triply infamous (his 
mother’s murderer, a homosexual, an assassin), was the first of the 
parricides not to have a hand cut off: ‘As the sentence was being 
read, he stood on the scaffold supported by the executioners. It was 
a horrible sight; wrapped in a large white shroud, his face covered 
with black crepe, the parricide escaped the gaze of the silent crowd, 
and beneath these mysterious and gloomy clothes, life was mani¬ 
fested only by frightful cries, which soon expired under the knife’ 
{Gazette des trihunaux, 30 August 1832). 

At the beginning of the nineteenth century, then, the great 
spectacle of physical punishment disappeared; the tortured body 
was avoided; the theatrical representation of pain was excluded from 
punishment. The age of sobriety in punishment had begun. By 
1830-48, public executions, preceded by torture, had almost entirely 
disappeared. Of course, this generalization requires some qualifica¬ 
tion. To begin with, the changes did not come about at once or as 
part of a single process. There were delays. Paradoxically, England 
was one of the countries most loath to see the disappearance of the 
public execution: perhaps because of the role of model that the 
institution of the jury, public hearings and respect of habeas corpus 
