The art of punishing, then, must rest on a wiiole teclinology of 
representation. The undertaking can succeed only if it forms part of 
a natural mechanics. ‘Like the gravitation of bodies, a secret force 
compels us ever towards our well-being. This impulsion is affected 
only by the obstacles that laws oppose to it. All the diverse actions 
of man are the effects of this interior tendency.’ To find the suitable 
punishment for a crime is to find the disadvantage whose idea is 
such that it robs for ever the idea of a crime of any attraction. It 
is an art of conflicting energies, an art of images linked by associa¬ 
tion, the forging of stable connections that defy time: it is a matter 
of establishing the representation of pairs of opposing values, of 
establishing quantitative differences between the opposing forces, 
of setting up a complex of obstacle-signs that may subject the 
movement of the forces to a power relation. ‘Let the idea of torture 
and execution be ever present in the heart of the weak man and 
dominate the feeling that drives him to crime’ (Beccaria, 119). These 
obstacle-signs must constitute the new arsenal of penalties, just as the 
old public executions were organized around a system of retaliatory 
marks. But in order to function, they must obey several conditions. 

I. They must be as unarbitrary as possible. It is true that it is 
society that defines, in terms of its own interests, what must be 
regarded as a crime: it is not therefore natural. But, if punishment 
is to present itself to the mind as soon as one thinks of committing a 
crime, as immediate a link as possible must be made between the 
two: a link of resemblance, analogy, proximity. ‘The penalty must 
be made to conform as closely as possible to the nature of the 
offence, so that fear of punishment diverts the mind from the road 
along which the prospect of an advantageous crime was leading it’ 
(Beccaria, 119). The ideal punishment would be transparent to the 


104 




The gentle way in punishment 


crime that it punishes; thus, for him who contemplates it, it will be 
infallibly the sign of the crime that it punishes; and for him who 
dreams of the crime, the idea of the offence will be enough to arouse 
the sign of the punishment. This is an advantage for the stability of 
the link, an advantage for the calculation of the proportions between 
crime and punishment and the quantitative reading of interests; it 
also has the advantage that, by assuming the form of a natural 
sequence, punishment does not appear as the arbitrary effect of a 
human power: ‘To derive the offence from the punishment is the 
best means of proportioning punishment to crime. If this is the 
