the repetitive discourse of criminology, find one of their precise 
functions here: by solemnly inscribing offences in the field of objects 
susceptible of scientific knowledge, they provide the mechanisms 
of legal punishment with a justifiable hold not only on offences, but 
on individuals; not only on what they do, but also on what they are, 
will be, may be. The additional factor of the offender’s soul, which 
the legal systenBihas laid hold of, is only apparently explanatory 


i8 



The body of the condemned 


and limitative, and is in fact expansionist. During the 150 or 200 
years that Europe has been setting up its new penal systems, the 
judges have gradually, by means of a process that goes back very far 
indeed, taken to judging something other than crimes, namely, the 
‘soul’ of the criminal. 

And, by that very fact, they have begun to do something other 
than pass judgement. Or, to be more precise, within the very judicial 
modality of judgement, other types of assessment have slipped in, 
profoundly altering its rules of elaboration. Ever since the Middle 
Ages slowly and painfully built up the great procedure of investiga¬ 
tion, to judge was to establish the truth of a crime, it was to deter¬ 
mine its author and to apply a legal punishment. Knowledge of the 
offence, knowledge of the offender, knowledge of the law: these 
three conditions made it possible to ground a judgement in truth. 
But now a quite different question of truth is inscribed in the course 
of the penal judgement. The question is no longer simply: ‘Has the 
act been established and is it punishable!*’ But also: ‘What is this act, 
what is this act of violence or this murder.^ To what level or to what 
field of reality does it belong.^ Is it a phantasy, a psychotic reaction, a 
delusional episode, a perverse action.^’ It is no longer simply: ‘Who 
committed it.^’ But: ‘How can we assign the causal process that 
produced it.^ Where did it originate in the author himself.’ Instinct, 
unconscious, environment, heredity.’’ It is no longer simply: ‘What 
law punishes this offence.’’ But: ‘What would be the most appropriate 
measures to take.’ How do we see the future development of the 
offender.’ What would be the best way of rehabilitating him.’’ A 
whole set of assessing, diagnostic, prognostic, normative judge¬ 
ments concerning the criminal have become lodged in the frame¬ 
work of penal judgement. Another truth has penetrated the truth 
that was required by the legal machinery; a truth which, entangled 
with the first, has turned the assertion of guilt into a strange 
scientifico-juridical complex. A significant fact is the way in which 
the question of madness has evolved in penal practice. According 
to the 1810 code, madness was dealt with only in terms of article 64. 
Now this article states that there is neither crime nor offence if the 
offender was of unsound mind at the time of the act. The possibility 
of ascertaining madness was, therefore, a quite separate matter from 
the definition of an act as a crime; the gravity of the act was not 


19 




Torture 


altered by the fact that its author was insane, nor the punishment 
reduced as a consequence; the crime itself disappeared. It was im¬ 
possible, therefore, to declare that someone was both guilty and 
mad; once the diagnosis of madness had been accepted, it could not 
be included in the judgement; it interrupted the procedure and 
loosened the hold of the law on the author of the act. Not only the 
examination of the criminal suspected of insanity, but the very 
effects of this examination had to be external and anterior to the 
sentence. But, very soon, the courts of the nineteenth century began 
to misunderstand the meaning of article 64. Despite several decisions 
of the supreme court of appeal confirming that insanity could not 
result either in a light penalty, or even in an acquittal, but required 
that the case be dismissed, the ordinary courts continued to bring 
the question of insanity to bear on their verdicts. They accepted 
that one could be both guilty and mad; less guilty the madder one 
was; guilty certainly, but someone to be put away and treated rather 
than punished; not only a guilty man, but also dangerous, since 
quite obviously sick, etc. From the point of view of the penal code, 
the result was a mass of juridical absurdities. But this was the starting 
point of an evolution that jurisprudence and legislation itself was to 
precipitate in the course of the next 150 years: already the reform 
of 1832, introducing attenuating circumstances, made it possible to 
modify the sentence according to the supposed degrees of an illness 
or the forms of a semi-insanity. And the practice of calling on 
psychiatric expertise, which is widespread in the assize courts and 
sometimes extended to courts of summary jurisdiction, means that 
the sentence, even if it is always formulated in terms of legal punish¬ 
ment, implies, more or less obscurely, judgements of normality, 
attributions of causality, assessments of possible changes, anticipa¬ 
tions as to the offender’s future. It would be wrong to say that all 
these operations give substance to a judgement from the outside; 
they are directly integrated in the process of forming the sentence. 
Instead of insanity eliminating the crime according to the original 
meaning of article 64, every crime and even every offence now 
carries within it, as a legitimate suspicion, but also as a right that may 
