pillory on a solemn market day, and that his upper lip be split so 
that the teeth appear.’ No doubt, at the classical period, this form 
of participation in the torture was no more than tolerated and 
attempts were made to limit it: because of the barbarities that it gave 
rise to and the usurpation it involved of the power to punish. But it 
belonged too closely to the general economy of the public execution 
for it to be eliminated altogether. Even in the eighteenth century, 
there were scenes like the one that accompanied the execution of 
Montigny in 1737; as the executioner was carrying out the execu¬ 
tion, the local fish-wives walked in procession, holding aloft an 
effigy of the condemned man, and then cut off its head (Anchel, 63). 
And very often, as they moved slowly in procession through it, 
criminals had to be ‘protected’ from the crowd - both as an example 
and as a target, a possible threat and a ‘prey’, promised but also 
forbidden. In calling on the crowd to manifest its power, the 
sovereign tolerated for a moment acts of violence, which he accepted 
as a sign of allegiance, but which were strictly limited by the sover¬ 
eign’s own privileges. 

Now it was on this point that the people, drawn to the spectacle 
intended to terrorize it, could express its rejection of the punitive 
power and sometimes revolt. Preventing an execution that was 
regarded as unjust, snatching a condemned man from the hands of 
the executioner, obtaining his pardon by force, possibly pursuing 
and assaulting the executioners, in any case abusing the judges and 


59 




Torture 


causing an uproar against the sentence - all this formed part of the 
popular practices that invested, traversed and often overturned the 
ritual of the public execution. TTiis often happened, of course, in the 
case of those condemned for rioting: there were the disturbances 
that followed a famous case of child abduction, when the crowd 
wanted to prevent the execution of three supposed rioters, who were 
to be hanged at the cemetery of Saint-Jean, ‘because there were 
fewer entrances and processions to guard’;* the terrified executioner 
cut down one of the condemned men; the archers let fly their arrows. 
It occurred again after the corn riots of 1775; and again in 1786, 
when the day-labourers marched on Versailles and set about freeing 
their arrested comrades. But apart from these cases, when the pro¬ 
cess of agitation had been triggered off previously and for reasons 
that did not concern some measure of penal justice, one finds many 
examples when the agitation was provoked directly by a verdict 
