innovations of the American system and also because it was not, 
like the others, doomed to immediate failure and abandonment; it 
was continuously re-examined and transformed right up to the 
great debates of the 1830s on penitentiary reform. In many respects 


123 



Punishment 


the Walnut Street Prison, opened in 1790, under the direct influence 
of the Quakers, was modelled on those of Ghent and Gloucester. 
There was compulsory work in workshops; the prisoners were kept 
constantly occupied; the prison was flnanced by this work, but the 
prisoners were also rewarded individually as a way of reinserting 
them morally and materially into the strict world of the economy; 
by keeping the prisoners ‘constantly employed on productive 
works, they were able to defray the expenses of the prison, they 
were not left idle and they were able to save a little money for the 
time when their captivity would cease’ (La Rochefoucauld-Lian- 
court, 9). Life was partitioned, therefore, according to an absolutely 
strict time-table, under constant supervision; each moment of the 
day was devoted to a particular type of activity, and brought with it 
its own obligations and prohibitions: ‘All prisoners rise at daybreak, 
so that, after making their beds, cleaning and washing themselves 
and attending to other needs, they generally begin their work at 
sunrise. From that moment, no one may go into the rooms or other 
places except to the workshops and places assigned for their work. 
... At nightfall, a bell rings to mark the end of their work... They 
are given half an hour to arrange their beds, after which they are not 
allowed to converse aloud or to make the least noise’ (Turnbull, 15- 
16). As at Gloucester, solitary confinement was not total; it was used 
for certain prisoners who would in former times have incurred the 
death penalty, and for those inside the prison who deserved special 
punishment: ‘There, without occupation, without anything to dis¬ 
tract him, waiting in uncertainty for the moment when he would be 
delivered’, the prisoner spent ‘long anxious hours, with nothing but 
the reflections that are present to the minds of all guilty persons’ 
(Teeters, 1935, 49). Lastly, as at Ghent, the length of the imprison¬ 
ment could vary with the behaviour of the prisoner: after consulting 
the files, the prison inspectors obtained from the authorities - with¬ 
out much difficulty up to the 1820s - pardons for prisoners who had 
shown good behaviour. 

Furthermore, Walnut Street had a number of characteristics that 
were specific to it, or which at least developed what was potentially 
present in the other models. First, the principle of not publicizing 
the penalty. Though the sentence and the reasons for it should be 
known to all, the penalty should be carried out in secret; the public 


124 



The gentle way in punishment 


was to intervene neither as a witness, nor as a guarantor of punish¬ 
ment; the certainty that, behind the walls, the prisoner was serving 
his sentence must suffice as an example: there were to be no more 
of those street spectacles which the law of 1786 has given rise to by 
imposing on certain prisoners public works to be carried out in 
towns and on the highways.The punishment and correction that 
it must operate are processes that unfold between the prisoner and 
those who supervise him. They are processes that effect a transforma¬ 
tion of the individual as a whole - of his body and of his habits by 
the daily work that he is forced to perform, of his mind and his will 
by the spiritual attentions that are paid to him: ‘Bibles and other 
books of religious practice are provided; the clergy of the different 
obediences to be found in the town and suburbs perform the services 
once a week and any other edifying person may have access to the 
prisoners at any time’ (Teeters, 1935, 53-4). But this transformation 
is entrusted to the administration itself. Solitude and self-examina¬ 
tion are not enough; nor are purely religious exhortations. Work on 
the prisoner’s soul must be carried out as often as possible. The 
prison, though an administrative apparatus, will at the same time be 
a machine for altering minds. On first entering the prison, the 
prisoner will be read the regulations; ‘at the same time, the inspectors 
seek to strengthen in him the moral obligations that he now has; 
they represent to him the offence that he has committed with regard 
to them, the evil that has consequently resulted for the society that 
protected him and the need to make compensation by his example 
and his amendment. They then make him promise to do his duty 
gladly, to behave decently, promising him or allowing him to hope 
that, before the expiration of the term of the sentence, he will be 
able to obtain his discharge if he behaves well. . . From time to 
time the inspectors make it their duty to converse with the criminals 
one after the other, concerning their duties as men and as members 
of society’ (Turnbull, 27). 

But no doubt the most important thing was that this control and 
transformation of behaviour were accompanied - both as a condition 
and as a consequence - by the development of a knowledge of the 
individuals. When the new prisoner arrived, the Walnut Street 
administration received a report concerning his crime, the circum¬ 
stances in which it was committed, a summary of the examinations 
