

duration, to take up their place once more in society without abusing 
it. . . The surest ways of making individuals better are work and 
education.’ Education consists not only in reading and arithmetic, but 
also in reconciling the prisoners with ‘ideas of order, morality, respect 
for themselves and for others’ (Beugnot, prefect of Seine-Inferieure, 
order issued Frimaire, Year X). In the reports that Chaptal demanded 
from the General Councils of the dipartements, over a dozen asked for 
prisons in which the inmates could be made to work. 

3 The most important were no doubt those proposed by Lucas, Marquet- 
Wasselot, Faucher, Bonneville, and a little later by Ferrus. It should 
be noted that most of them were not philanthropists, criticizing the 
carceral institution from the outside, but were bound up, in one way or 
another, with the administration of the prisons. They were official 
technicians. 

4 In Germany, Julius directed the Jahrbucher fiir Strafs-und Besserungs 
Anstalten. 

5 Although these newspapers were above all organs of defence on the 
part of those in prison for debt and had on several occasions dissoci¬ 
ated themselves from delinquents as such, one finds the statement that 
‘the columns of Pauvre Jacques are not devoted to an exclusive 
speciality. The terrible law of constraint by body and its disastrous 
application will not be the only target of the journalist prisoner. . . 
Pauvre Jacques will draw the attention of its readers to places of 
reclusion and detention, prisons and almshouses; it will not keep silent 
on places where the guilty man is handed over to torture when the law 
condemns him only to work ...’ {Pauvre Jacques, ist year, no. 7). 
Similarly, the Gaiette de Sainte-Pelagie campaigned for a penitentiary 
system whose aim would be ‘the amelioration of the species’, any other 
being ‘the expression of a still barbarous society’ (21 March 1833). 

6 The discussion that began in France about 1830 was still continuing in 
1850; Charles Lucas, the advocate of Auburn, was the inspiration 
behind the order of 1839 on the running of the maisons centrales (work 
in common and absolute silence). The wave of revolt that followed 
and perhaps the general agitation in the country in the years 1842-3 
resulted in the adoption in 1844 of the Pennsylvanian regime of 
absolute isolation, advocated by Demetz, Blouet and Tocqueville. But 
the second penitentiary congress in 1847 opted against this method. 

7 ‘Every man’, said Fox, ‘is illuminated by the divine light and I have 
seen it shine through every man.’ It was in the spirit of the Quakers 
and of Walnut Street that the prisons of Pennsylvania, Pittsburgh and 
Cherry Hill were organized from 1820. 


318 



Notes 


8 Abbe Petigny, Allocution adressie aux prisormiers, d Voccasion de 
Vinauguration des bdtiments cdlulaires de la prison de Versailles. Cf., 
a few years later, in The Count of Monte Cristo, a very clearly Christo- 
logical version of resurrection after incarceration; in this case prison 
teaches not docility to the law, but the power, acquired through a 
secret knowledge, to dispense justice beyond the injustice of the 
magistrates. 

9 G. A. Real. Before this, several instructions from the Ministry of the 
Interior had stressed the need for providing work for prisoners: 5 
Fructidor Year VI, 3 Messidor Year VIII, 8 Pluviose and 28 Ventdse 
Year IX, 7 Brumaire Year X. Immediately after the codes of 1808 and 
1810, one srill finds new instructions^ 20 October 1811, 8 December 
1812; or again the long order of 1816: ‘It is of the greatest importance 
to keep prisoners occupied as much as possible. One must instil in 
them a desire to work, distinguishing between the fate of those who 
are occupied and that of prisoners who wish to remain idle. The first 
will be better fed and have more comfortable beds than the second.’ 
Melun and Clairvaux were very soon organized into great workshops. 

10 Bonneville, 1846, 6 . Bonneville proposed measures of ‘preparatory 
liberty’, but also of ‘afflictive additions’ or an extension of imprison¬ 
ment if it was shown that ‘the penal prescription, fixed approximately 
according to the probable degree of the prisoner’s obduracy was not 
enough to produce the effect expected of it’. This extension was not to 
exceed one eighth of the original penalty; preparatory liberty could 
begin after three quarters of the sentence had been served (Traiti des 
diverses institutions compUmentaires, 25 iff). 

11 In Gaiette des tribunaux. Cf. also Marquet-Wasselot, 1832, 74-5. 
Lucas notes that minor offenders ‘are generally recruited among the 
urban populations’ and that ‘the majority of those sentenced to hard 
labour come from the agricultural populations’ (Lucas, I, 46-50). 

12 ‘If one treats of the administrative question by abstracting the question 
of buildings, one runs the risk of drawing up principles that are based 
on no reality; whereas, with a sufficient knowledge of administrative 
needs, an architect may accept a particular system of imprisonment 
that theory may have dismissed as Utopian’ (Blouet, i). 

13 ‘The English reveal their genius for mechanics in everything they 
do . .. and they want their buildings to function as a machine subject 
to the action of a single motor’ (Baltard, 18). 
