population: '7,000 persons handed back each year to society... they 
are 7,000 principles of crime or corruption spread throughout the 
social body. And, when one thinks that this population is constantly 
increasing, that it lives and moves around us, ready to seize every 
opportunity of disorder, to avail itself of every crisis in society to 
try out its strength, can one remain unmoved by such a spectacle.^’ 
(Beaumont and Tocqueville, 22-3). 

- The prison cannot fail to produce delinquents. It does so by 
the very type of existence that it imposes on its inmates: whether 
they are isolated in cells or whether they are given useless work, 
for which they will find no employment, it is, in any case, not ‘to 
think of man in society; it is to create an unnatural, useless and dan¬ 
gerous existence’; the prison should educate its inmates, but can a 
system of education addressed to man reasonably have as its object 
to act against the wishes of nature.^ (Lucas, I, 127 and 130). The 
prison also produces delinquents by imposing violent constraints 
on its inmates; it is supposed to apply the law, and to teach respect 
for it; but all its functioning operates in the form of an abuse of 
power. The arbitrary power of administration: ‘The feeling of in¬ 
justice that a prisoner has is one of the causes that may make his 
character untamable. When he sees himself exposed in this way to 
suffering, which the law has neither ordered nor envisaged, he 
becomes habitually angry against everything around him; he sees 
every agent of authority as an executioner; he no longer thinks that 
he was guilty: he accuses justice itself’ (Bigot Preameneu). Corrup¬ 
tion, fear and the inefficiency of the warders: ‘Between 1,000 and 
1,500 convicts live under the surveillance of between thirty and 
forty supervisors, who can preserve some kind of security only by 
depending on informers, that is to say, on the corruption that they 
carefully sow themselves. Who are these warders.^ Retired soldiers, 
men uninstructed in their task, making a trade of guarding male¬ 
factors’ {La Fraternite, March 1842). Exploitation by penal labour, 
which can in these conditions have no educational character: ‘One 
inveighs against the slave-trade. But are not our prisoners sold. 


266 



Illegalities and delinquency 


like the slaves, by entrepreneurs and bought by manufacturers. . . 
Is this how we teach our prisoners honesty.^ Are they not still more 
demoralized by these examples of abominable exploitation.^’® 

- The prison makes possible, even encourages, the organization 

