that the machinery of justice must be duplicated by an organ of 
surveillance that would work side by side with it, and which would 
make it possible either to prevent crimes, or, if committed, to arrest 
their authors; police and justice must work together as two comple¬ 
mentary actions of the same process - the police assuring ‘the action 
of society on each individual’, justice ‘the rights of individuals 
against society’ (Duport, Archives parlementaires, XXI, 45). Thus 
every crime will come to the light of day and be punished in all 
certainty. But it is also necessary that the legal procedures should 
not remain secret, that the reasons why a defendant is condemned or 
acquitted should be known to all, and each individual must be able 
to recognize the reasons for a penalty: ‘Let the magistrate speak his 
opinion aloud, let him be obliged to read in his judgement the text 
of the law that condemns the defendant. . . Let the procedures that 
are buried mysteriously in the obscurity of the records office be 
opened to all citizens who are concerned at the fate of the con¬ 
demned’ (Mably, 348). 

The rule of common truth. Beneath this ordinary-seeming principle 
is hidden an important transformation. The old system of legal 


96 




Generalized punishment 


proofs, the use of torture, the extraction of confessions, the use of 
the public execution, the body and spectacle for the reproduction 
of truth had long isolated penal practice from the common forms of 
demonstration: semi-proofs produced semi-truths and semi-guilty 
persons, words extracted by pain had greater authenticity, presump¬ 
tion involved a degree of punishment. The heterogeneity of this 
system with the ordinary system of proof really constituted a scandal 
only when the power to punish needed, for its own economy, a 
climate of irrefutable certainty. How can one link absolutely in the 
minds of men the idea of crime and the idea of punishment, if the 
reality of the punishment does not follow, in all cases, the reality 
of the offence.^ To establish the offence, in all evidence, and accord¬ 
ing to* the means valid for all, becomes a task of first importance. 
The verification of the crime must obey the general criteria for all 
truth. In the arguments it employs, in the proofs it provides, legal 
judgement must be homogeneous with judgement in general. There 
is, therefore, an abandonment of legal proof, a rejection of torture, 
the need for a complete demonstration of the truth, an effacement 
of all correlation between degrees of suspicion and degrees of 
punishment. Like a mathematical truth, the truth of the crime will 
be accepted only when it is completely proven. It follows that, up 
to the final demonstration of his crime, the defendant must be 
regarded as innocent; and that, in order to carry out this demonstra¬ 
tion, the judge must use not ritual forms, but common instruments, 
that reason possessed by everyone, which is also that of philoso¬ 
phers and scientists: ‘In theory, I regard the magistrate as a philoso¬ 
pher who sets out to discover an interesting truth. . . His sagacity 
will enable him to grasp all the circumstances and all the relations, 
bring together or separate whatever needs to be brought together 
or separated in order to arrive at a sane judgement’ (Seigneux de 
Correvon, 49). The investigation, the exercise of common reason, 
lays aside the old inquisitorial model and adopts the much more 
subtle model (doubly validated by science and common sense) of 
empirical research. The judge will be like a ‘pilot steering between 
the rocks’: ‘What proofs or what clues will be considered to be 
suflicient neither I nor anyone else has dared to determine in general; 
since circumstances are subject to infinite variations, since proofs 
and clues must be deduced from these circumstances, the clearest 


97 




Punishment 


clues and proofs must necessarily vary in proportion’ (Risi, 53). 
Henceforth, penal practice was to be subject to a common rule of 
truth, or rather to a complex rule in which heterogeneous elements 
of scientific demonstration, the evidence of the senses and common 
sense come together to form the judge’s ‘deep-seated conviction’. 
Although penal justice preserves the forms that guarantee its equity, 
it may now be opened up to all manner of truths, providing they 
are evident, well founded, acceptable to all. The legal ritual in itself 
no longer generates a divided truth. It is resituated in the field of 
reference of common proofs. With the multiplicity of scientific 
discourses, a difficult, infinite relation was then forged that penal 
justice is still unable to control. The master of justice is no longer 
the master of its truth. 

The rule of optimal specification. For penal semiotics to cover the 
whole field of illegalities that one wishes to eliminate, all offences 
must be defined; they must be classified and collected into species 
from which none of them can escape. A code is therefore necessary 
and this code must be sufficiently precise for each type of offence to 
be clearly present in it. The silence of the law must not harbour the 
hope of impunity. An exhaustive, explicit code is required, defining 
crimes and fixing penalties. (On this theme, cf., among others, 
