crowd to the University and to the Cordeliers Cemetery. His 
servant was also beaten and, with bruises on his head and body, was 
taken to the hospital where he died some days later. However, some 
strangers and unknown people mounted the ladder and cut the rope 
while others caught the hanged man from below after he had been 
hanging there longer than it took to say a full Miserere. The crowd 
then smashed the gallows and broke the executioner’s ladder into 
pieces. . . Children carried off the gallows and threw it into the 
Rhone.’ The condemned man was then taken to a cemetery ‘so that 
he should not be recaptured by the law and from there to the church 
of Sainte-Antoine’. The archbishop gave him his pardon, had him 
taken to the hospital and asked that particular care be taken of him. 
Lastly, adds the writer of the account, ‘we had a new suit, two pairs 
of stockings and shoes made for him. We dressed him in new 
clothes from head to toe. Our colleagues gave him shirts, breeches 
and a wig’ (Duhamel, 5-6; scenes of this kind were still taking 


64 




The spectacle of the scaffold 


place in the nineteenth century - cf. Lawrence, 56 and 195-8). 

The other event took place in Paris, a century later. It was in 1775, 
shortly after the com riot. Because of the state of extreme tension 
among the people, the authorities wanted the execution to take 
place without interruption. Between the scaffold and the public, 
kept at a safe distance, two ranks of soldiers stood on guard, one 
facing the execution that was about to take place, the other facing 
the people in case of riot. Contact was broken: it was a public 
execution, but one in which the element of spectacle was neutralized, 
or rather reduced to abstract intimidation. Protected by force of 
arms, on an empty square, justice quietly did its work. If it showed 
the death that it had dealt, it was from high and far: ‘The two 
gallows, which were eighteen feet high, no doubt by way of an 
example, were not set up until three o’clock in the afternoon. From 
two o’clock, the Place de Gr^ve and all the surrounding streets had 
been filled with detachments of different troops, some on foot, some 
on horse; the Swiss and the French guards continued to patrol the 
adjacent streets. No one was allowed on to the Greve during the 
execution, and all around one could see a double row of soldiers, 
bayonets at the ready, standing back to back, so that some looked 
outwards and some into the square; the two wretches ... cried out 
all the way that they were innocent and continued to protest in like 
manner as they mounted the ladder’ (Hardy, III, 67). Whatever the 
part played by feelings of humanity for the condemned in the 
abandonment of the liturgy of the public executions, there was, in 
any case, on the part of the state power, a political fear of the effects 
of these ambiguous rituals. 

Such an equivocal attitude appeared clearly in what might be 
called the ‘gallows speeches’. The rite of execution was so arranged 
that the condemned man would himself proclaim his guilt by the 
amende honorable that he spoke, by the placard that he displayed 
and also by the statements that he was no doubt forced to make. 
Furthermore, at the moment of the execution, it seems that he was 
given another opportunity to speak, not to proclaim his innocence, 
but to acknowledge his crime and the justice of his conviction. The 
chronicles relate a good many speeches of this kind. Were they 
actually delivered.^ In a number of cases, certainly. Or were they 


65 




Torture 


fictional speeches that were later circulated by way of example and 
exhortation? This, no doubt, was more often the case. What credit 
are we to accord, for example, to the account of the death of Marion 
Le Goff, who had been a famous bandit leader in Brittany in the 
mid-eighteenth century? She is supposed to have cried out from the 
scaffold: ‘Fathers and mothers who hear me now, watch over your 
children and teach them well; in my childhood I was a liar and good- 
for-nothing; I began by stealing a small six-liard knife. . . Then I 
robbed pedlars and cattle dealers; finally, I led a robber band and 
that is why I am here. Tell all this to your children and let it be an 
example to them’ (Corre, 257). Such a speech is too close, even in its 
turn of phrase, to the morality traditionally to be found in the 
broadsheets and pamphlets for it not to be apocryphal. But the 
existence of the ‘last words of a condemned man’ genre is in itself 
significant. The law required that its victim should authenticate in 
some sense the tortures that he had undergone. The criminal was 
asked to consecrate his own punishment by proclaiming the black¬ 
ness of his crimes; he was made to say, as was Jean-Dominique 
Langlade, three times a murderen ‘Listen to my horrible, infamous 
and lamentable deed, committed in the city of Avignon, where the 
memory of me is execrable, for having inhumanly violated the 
sacred rites of friendship’ (Duhamel, 32). In one sense, the broad¬ 
sheet and the death song were the sequel to the trial; or rather they 
pursued that mechanism by which the public execution transferred 
the secret, written truth of the procedure to the body, gesture and 
