
This was especially the case if the conviction was regarded as 
unjust - or if one saw a man of the people put to death, for a crime 
that would have merited, for someone better born or richer, a com¬ 
paratively light penalty. It would seem that certain practices of penal 
justice were no longer supported in the eighteenth century - and 
perhaps .for longer - by the lower strata of the population. This 
would explain why executions could easily lead to the beginnings 
of social disturbances. Since the poorest - it was a magistrate who 
made the observation (Dupaty, 1786, 247) - could not be heard in 
the courts of law, it was where the law was manifested publicly, 
where they were called upon to act as witnesses and almost as co¬ 
adjutors of this law, that they could intervene, physically: enter by 
force into the punitive mechanism and redistribute its effects; take 
up in another sense the violence of the punitive rituals. There was 
agitation against the difference in p>enalties according to social class: 
in 1781, the parish priest of Champre had been killed by the lord 
of the manor, and an attempt was made to declare the murderer 
insane; ‘the peasants, who were extremely attached to their pastor, 
were furious and had at first seemed ready to lay violent hands upon 
their lord and to set fire to the castle. . . Everyone protested, and 
rightly, against the indulgence of the minister who deprived justice 
of the means of punishing so abominable a crime’ (Hardy, IV, 394). 


61 



Torture 


There was agitation, too, against the excessive sentences passed on 
certain common offences that were not regarded as serious (such as 
house-breaking); or against punishments for certain offences con¬ 
nected with social conditions such as petty larceny; the death penalty 
for this crime aroused a great deal of discontent, because there were 
many domestic servants in a single household and it was difficult 
for them, in such a case, to prove their innocence, and also because 
they could easily be victims of their employers’ spite and because 
the indulgence of certain masters who shut their eyes to such 
behaviour made the fate of servants accused, condemned and hanged 
even more iniquitous. The execution of such servants often gave 
rise to protests (cf. Hardy, I, 319, 367; III, 227-8; IV, 180). There 
was a small riot in Paris in 1761 in favour of a servant woman who 
had stolen a piece of cloth from her master. Despite the fact that the 
woman admitted her guilt, handed back the material and begged for 
mercy, the master refused to withdraw his complaint; on the day 
of the execution, the local people prevented the hanging, invaded the 
merchant’s shop and looted it; in the end, the servant was pardoned, 
