constructed an island on the Loire; Toufait built Le Creusot in the 
valley of the Charbonni^re, which he transformed, and he had 
workers’ accommodation built in the factory itself); it was a change 
of scale, but it was also a new type of control. The factory was 
explicitly compared with the monastery, the fortress, a walled town; 
the guardian ‘will open the gates only on the return of the workers, 
and after the bell that announces the resumption of work has been 
rung’; a quarter of an hour later no one will be admitted; at the end 
of the day, the workshops’ heads will hand back the keys to the Swiss 
guard of the factory, who will then open the gates {Amboise, f. 
12,1301). The aim is to derive the maximum advantages and to 
neutralize the inconveniences (thefts, interruptions of work, dis¬ 
turbances and ‘cabals’), as the forces of production become more 
concentrated; to protect materials and tools and to master the labour 
force: ‘The order and inspection that must be maintained require 


142 




Docile bodies 


that all workers be assembled under the same roof, so that the part¬ 
ner who is entrusted with the management of the manufactory may 
prevent and remedy abuses that may arise among the workers and 
arrest their progress at the outset’ (Dauphin, 199). 

2. But the principle of ‘enclosure’ is neither constant, nor indis¬ 
pensable, nor sufficient in disciplinary machinery. This machinery 
works space in a much more flexible and detailed way. It does this 
first of all on the principle of elementary location or partitioning. 
Each individual has his own place; and each place its individual. 
Avoid distributions in groups; break up collective dispositions; 
analyse confused, massive or transient pluralities. Disciplinary space 
tends to be divided into as many sections as there are bodies or 
elements to be distributed. One must eliminate the effects of impre¬ 
cise distributions, the uncontrolled disappearance of individuals, 
their diffuse circulation, their unusable and dangerous coagulation; 
it was a tactic of anti-desertion, anti-vagabondage, anti-concentra¬ 
tion. Its aim was to establish presences and absences, to know where 
and how to locate individuals, to set up useful communications, to 
interrupt others, to be able at each moment to supervise the conduct 
of each individual, to assess it, to judge it, to calculate its qualities 
or merits. It was a procedure, therefore, aimed at knowing, master¬ 
ing and using. Discipline organizes an analytical space. 

And there, too, it encountered an old architectural and religious 
