
Torture 


scaffold and said that it had certainly not been set up for him, since 
he was innocent; he first asked to return to the chamber, where he 
beat about the bush for half an hour, still trying to justify himself; 
then, when he was sent back to execution, he ascended the scaffold 
with a purposeful air, but, when he saw himself undressed and tied 
to the cross before being stretched, he asked to go back to the 
chamber a second time and there made a full confession of his 
crimes and even declared that he was guilty of another murder’ 
(Hardy, IV, 8o). The function of the public torture and execution 
was to reveal the truth; and in this respect it continued, in the public 
eye, the work of the judicial torture conducted in private. It added 
to the conviction the signature of the convicted man. A successful 
public execution justified justice, in that it published the truth of the 
crime in the very body of the man to be executed. An example of the 
good condemned man was Frangois Billiard, a senior postal official, 
who murdered his wife in 1772. The executioner wanted to hide 
his face to spare him the insults of the crowd: ‘ “This punishment, 
which I have merited, has not been inflicted upon me,” he said, “so 
that I should not be seen by the public. . .” He was still wearing 
mourning dress in honour of his wife. . . He was wearing new 
shoes, his hair had been recently curled and powdered, and he had a 
countenance so modest and so dignified that those present who 
found themselves observing him more closely said that he must be 
the most perfect Christian or the greatest of all hypocrites. The 
placard that he was wearing on his chest had gone askew, and it was 
noticed that he had straightened it himself, no doubt so that people 
could read it the more easily’ (Hardy, I, 327). If each of the partici¬ 
pants played his role well, the penal ceremony had the effectiveness 
of a long public confession. 

3. It pinned the public torture on to the crime itself; it established 
from one to the other a series of decipherable relations. It was an 
exhibition of the corpse of the condemned man at the scene of his 
crime, or at one of the near-by crossroads. The execution was often 
carried out at the very place where the crime had been committed - 
as in the case of the student who, in 1723, had killed several persons 
and for whom the presidial court of Nantes decided to set up a 
scaffold in front of the inn where he had committed his murders 
(Nantes, F.F. 124; cf. Parfouru, XXV). There was the use of 


44 



The spectacle of the scaffold 


‘symbolic’ torture in which the forms of the execution referred to 
the nature of the crime: the tongues of blasphemers were pierced, the 
impure were burnt, the right hand of murderers was cut off; some¬ 
times the condemned man was made to carry the instrument of his 
crime - thus Damiens was made to hold in his guilty right hand the 
famous dagger with which he had committed the crime, hand and 
dagger being smeared with sulphur and burnt together. As Vico 
remarked, this old jurisprudence was ‘an entire poetics’. 

There were even some cases of an almost theatrical reproduction 
of the crime in the execution of the guilty man - with the same 
instruments, the same gestures. Thus justice had the crime re¬ 
enacted before the eyes of all, publishing it in its truth and at the 
same time annulling it in the death of the guilty man. Even as late 
in the eighteenth century as 1772, one finds sentences like the follow¬ 
ing: a servant girl at Cambrai, having killed her mistress, was con¬ 
demned to be taken to the place of her execution in a cart ‘used to 
collect rubbish at the crossroads’; there a gibbet was to be set up 
‘at the foot of which will be placed the same chair in which the said 
Laleu, her mistress, was sitting at the time of the murder; and having 
seated the criminal there, the executioner of the High Court of 
Justice will cut off her right hand, throw it in her presence into the 
fire, and, immediately afterwards, will strike her four blows with 
the cleaver with which she murdered the said Laleu, the first and 
second being on the head, the third on the left forearm and the 
fourth on the chest; this done, she will be hung and strangled on the 
said gibbet until she be dead; and when two hours have elapsed her 
dead body will be removed and the head separated from it at the 
foot of the said gibbet on the said scaffold, with the same cleaver 
she used to murder her mistress, and the same head exhibited 
on a pole twenty feet high outside the gates of the said Cambrai, 
within reach of the road that leads to Douai, and the rest of the body 
put in a sack, and buried near the said pole at a depth of ten feet’ 
(quoted in Dautricourt, 269-70). 

4. Lastly, the slowness of the process of torture and execution, 
its sudden dramatic moments, the cries and sufferings of the con¬ 
demned man serve as an ultimate proof at the end of the judicial 
ritual. Every death agony expresses a certain truth: but, when it 
takes place on the scaffold, it does so with more intensity, in that it 


45 




Torture 
