docks, then passed on to the receivers - wholesale receivers, 
specializing in certain kinds of commodity, and retail receivers 
whose stalls offered a ‘wretched display of old iron, rags and worn 
clothes, whereas at the back of the shop were hidden naval munitions 
of great value, copper bolts and nails, pieces of cast iron and precious 
metals, produce from the West Indies, furniture and all kinds of 
goods bought from the labourers’ — then on to dealers and pedlars 
who distributed the stolen goods far into the countryside (Colqu¬ 
houn, 1797; in chapters VII, VIII and XV, he gives a very detailed 
account of this process); third, counterfeiting (it seems that there 
were between forty and fifty mints producing counterfeit money 
throughout England, in permanent operation). But what facilitated 
the work of this huge undertaking, involving both depredation and 
competition, was a whole set of tolerances: some amounted almost 
to acquired right (the right, for example, to collect bits of iron or 
rope around ships or to resell the sugar sweepings); others were of 
the nature of a moral acceptance; the pilferers themselves regarded 
their work as a kind of smuggling, which ‘they did not regard as a 
serious offence’. 

It proved necessary, therefore, to control these illicit practices 
and introduce new legislation to cover them. The offences had to be 
properly defined and more surely punished; out of this mass of 
irregularities, sometimes tolerated and sometimes punished with a 
severity out of all proportion to the offence, one had to determine 
what was an intolerable offence, and the offenders had to be appre¬ 
hended and punished. With the new forms of capital accumulation, 
new relations of production and the new legal status of property, 
all the popular practices that belonged, either in a silent, everyday. 


86 




Generalized punishment 


tolerated form, or in a violent form, to the illegality of rights were 
reduced by force to an illegality of property. In that movement 
which transformed a society of juridico-political levies into a society 
of the appropriation of the means and products of labour, theft 
tended to become the first of the great loopholes in legality. Or, to 
put it another way, the economy of illegalities was restructured 
with the development of capitalist society. The illegality of property 
was separated from the illegality of rights. This distinction repre¬ 
sents a class opposition because, on the one hand, the illegality 
that was to be most accessible to the lower classes was that of 
property - the violent transfer of ownership - and because, on the 
other, the bourgeoisie was to reserve to itself the illegality of rights: 
the possibility of getting round its own regulations and its own laws, 
of ensuring for itself an immense sector of economic circulation by 
a skilful manipulation of gaps in the law - gaps that were foreseen 
by its silences, or opened up by de facto tolerance. And this great 
redistribution of illegalities was even to be expressed through a 
specialization of the legal circuits: for illegalities of property - for 
theft - there were the ordinary courts and punishments; for the 
illegalities of rights - fraud, tax evasion, irregular commercial 
operations - special legal institutions applied with transactions, 
accommodations, reduced fines, etc. The bourgeoisie reserved to 
itself the fruitful domain of the illegality of rights. And at the same 
time as this split was taking place, there emerged the need for 
a constant policing concerned essentially with this illegality of 
property. It became necessary to get rid of the old economy of the 
power to punish, based on the principles of the confused and in¬ 
adequate multiplicity of authorities, the distribution and concentra¬ 
tion of the power correlative with actual inertia and inevitable 
tolerance, punishments that were spectacular in their manifestations 
and haphazard in their application. It became necessary to define a 
strategy and techniques of punishment in which an economy of 
continuity and permanence would replace that of expenditure and 
excess. In short, penal reform was born at the point of junction 
between the struggle against the super-power of the sovereign and 
that against the infra-power of acquired and tolerated illegalities. 
And if penal reform was anything more than the temporary result 
of a purely circumstantial encounter, it was because, between this 


87 




Punishment 


super-power and this infra-power, a whole network of relations 
was being formed. By placing on the side of the sovereign the 
additional burden of a spectacular, unlimited, personal, irregular 
and discontinuous power, the form of monarchical sovereignty left 
the subjects free to practise a constant illegality; this illegality was 
like the correlative of this type of power. So much so that in attack¬ 
ing the various prerogatives of the sovereign one was also attacking 
the functioning of the illegalities. The two objectives were in con¬ 
tinuity. And, according to particular circumstances or tactics, the 
reformers laid more stress on one or the other. Le Trosne, the 
physiocrat who was a judge at the presidial court of Orleans, may 
serve as an example. In 1764, he published a memorandum on vaga¬ 
bondage: that hot-bed of thieves and murderers ‘who live in the 
