adapted to every movement... would be easier to move and lead’ 
(Guibert, xxxvi). Tactics, the spatial ordering of men; taxonomy. 


148 




Docile bodies 


the disciplinary space of natural beings; the economic table, the 
regulated movement of wealth. 

But the table does not have the same function in these different 
registers. In the order of the economy, it makes possible the 
measurement of quantities and the analysis of movements. In the 
form of taxonomy, it has the function of characterizing (and con¬ 
sequently reducing individual singularities) and constituting classes 
(and therefore of excluding considerations of number). But in the 
form of the disciplinary distribution, on the other hand, the table 
has the function of treating multiplicity itself, distributing it and 
deriving from it as many effects as possible. Whereas natural 
taxonomy is situated on the axis that links character and category, 
disciplinary tactics is situated on the axis that links the singular and 
the multiple. It allows both the characterization of the individual 
as individual and the ordering of a given multiplicity. It is the first 
condition for the control and use of an ensemble of distinct elements: 
the base for a micro-physics of what might be called a ‘cellular’ 
power. 


The control of activity 

I. The time-table is an old inheritance. The strict model was no 
doubt suggested by the monastic communities. It soon spread. Its 
three great methods - establish rhythms, impose particular occupa¬ 
tions, regulate the cycles of repetition — were soon to be found in 
schools, workshops and hospitals. The new disciplines had no diffi¬ 
culty in taking up their place in the old forms; the schools and poor- 
houses extended the life and the regularity of the monastic com¬ 
munities to which they were often attached. The rigours of the 
industrial period long retained a religious air; in the seventeenth 
century, the regulations of the great manufactories laid down the 
exercises that would divide up the working day: ‘On arrival in the 
morning, before beginning their work, all persons shall wash their 
hands, offer up their work to God and make the sign of the cross’ 
(Saint-Maur, article i); but even in the nineteenth century, when the 
rural populations were needed in industry, they were sometimes 
