part played by feelings of humanity for the condemned in the 
abandonment of the liturgy of the public executions, there was, in 
any case, on the part of the state power, a political fear of the effects 
of these ambiguous rituals. 

Such an equivocal attitude appeared clearly in what might be 
called the ‘gallows speeches’. The rite of execution was so arranged 
that the condemned man would himself proclaim his guilt by the 
amende honorable that he spoke, by the placard that he displayed 
and also by the statements that he was no doubt forced to make. 
Furthermore, at the moment of the execution, it seems that he was 
given another opportunity to speak, not to proclaim his innocence, 
but to acknowledge his crime and the justice of his conviction. The 
chronicles relate a good many speeches of this kind. Were they 
actually delivered.^ In a number of cases, certainly. Or were they 


65 




Torture 


fictional speeches that were later circulated by way of example and 
exhortation? This, no doubt, was more often the case. What credit 
are we to accord, for example, to the account of the death of Marion 
Le Goff, who had been a famous bandit leader in Brittany in the 
mid-eighteenth century? She is supposed to have cried out from the 
scaffold: ‘Fathers and mothers who hear me now, watch over your 
children and teach them well; in my childhood I was a liar and good- 
for-nothing; I began by stealing a small six-liard knife. . . Then I 
robbed pedlars and cattle dealers; finally, I led a robber band and 
that is why I am here. Tell all this to your children and let it be an 
example to them’ (Corre, 257). Such a speech is too close, even in its 
turn of phrase, to the morality traditionally to be found in the 
broadsheets and pamphlets for it not to be apocryphal. But the 
existence of the ‘last words of a condemned man’ genre is in itself 
significant. The law required that its victim should authenticate in 
some sense the tortures that he had undergone. The criminal was 
asked to consecrate his own punishment by proclaiming the black¬ 
ness of his crimes; he was made to say, as was Jean-Dominique 
Langlade, three times a murderen ‘Listen to my horrible, infamous 
and lamentable deed, committed in the city of Avignon, where the 
memory of me is execrable, for having inhumanly violated the 
sacred rites of friendship’ (Duhamel, 32). In one sense, the broad¬ 
sheet and the death song were the sequel to the trial; or rather they 
pursued that mechanism by which the public execution transferred 
the secret, written truth of the procedure to the body, gesture and 
