
2. This complex of signs must engage with the mechanics of 
forces: reduce the desire that makes the crime attractive; increase 
the interest that makes the penalty be feared; reverse the relation of 
intensities, so that the representation of the penalty and its dis¬ 
advantages is more lively than that of the crime and its pleasures. 
There is a whole mechanics, therefore, of interest, of its movement, 
of the way that one represents it to oneself and of the liveliness of 
this representation. ‘The legislator must be a skilful architect who 
knows how to employ all the forces that may contribute to the 
solidity of the building and reduce all those that might ruin it’ 
(Beccaria, 135). 

There are several ways of achieving this. ‘Go straight to the 
source of evil’ (Mably, 246). Smash the mainspring that animates the 
representation of the crime. Weaken the interest that brought it to 
birth. Behind the offences of the vagabond, there is laziness; that 
is what one must fight against. ‘One will not succeed by locking 
beggars up in filthy prisons that are more like cesspools’; they will 
have to be forced to work. ‘The best way of punishing them is to 
employ them’ (Brissot, 258). Against a bad passion, a good habit; 
against a force, another force, but it must be the force of sensibility 
and passion, not that of armed power. ‘Must one not deduce all 
penalties from this principle, which is so simple, so appropriate and 
already well known, namely, to choose them in that which is most 
subduing for the passion that led to the crime committed.^’ (Lacre- 
telle, 361). 

Set the force that drove the criminal to the crime against itself. 
Divide interest, use it to make the penalty something to be feared. 


106 



The gentle way in punishment 


Let the punishment irritate it and stimulate it more than the crime 
was able to flatter it. If pride led to the committing of a crime, let 
it be hurt, let the punishment disgust it. Shameful punishments are 
effective because they are based on the vanity that was at the root 
of the crime. Fanatics glory both in their opinions and in the tor¬ 
tures that they endure for them. Let us, therefore, set against 
fanaticism the proud obstinacy that sustains it: ‘Reduce it with 
ridicule and shame; if one humiliates the proud vanity of fanatics 
before a great crowd of spectators, one may expect happy effects 
from this punishment.’ It would be quite useless, on the other hand, 
to impose physical pain on them. (Beccaria, 113). 
