be accepted only when it is completely proven. It follows that, up 
to the final demonstration of his crime, the defendant must be 
regarded as innocent; and that, in order to carry out this demonstra¬ 
tion, the judge must use not ritual forms, but common instruments, 
that reason possessed by everyone, which is also that of philoso¬ 
phers and scientists: ‘In theory, I regard the magistrate as a philoso¬ 
pher who sets out to discover an interesting truth. . . His sagacity 
will enable him to grasp all the circumstances and all the relations, 
bring together or separate whatever needs to be brought together 
or separated in order to arrive at a sane judgement’ (Seigneux de 
Correvon, 49). The investigation, the exercise of common reason, 
lays aside the old inquisitorial model and adopts the much more 
subtle model (doubly validated by science and common sense) of 
empirical research. The judge will be like a ‘pilot steering between 
the rocks’: ‘What proofs or what clues will be considered to be 
suflicient neither I nor anyone else has dared to determine in general; 
since circumstances are subject to infinite variations, since proofs 
and clues must be deduced from these circumstances, the clearest 


97 




Punishment 


clues and proofs must necessarily vary in proportion’ (Risi, 53). 
Henceforth, penal practice was to be subject to a common rule of 
truth, or rather to a complex rule in which heterogeneous elements 
of scientific demonstration, the evidence of the senses and common 
sense come together to form the judge’s ‘deep-seated conviction’. 
Although penal justice preserves the forms that guarantee its equity, 
it may now be opened up to all manner of truths, providing they 
are evident, well founded, acceptable to all. The legal ritual in itself 
no longer generates a divided truth. It is resituated in the field of 
reference of common proofs. With the multiplicity of scientific 
discourses, a difficult, infinite relation was then forged that penal 
justice is still unable to control. The master of justice is no longer 
the master of its truth. 

The rule of optimal specification. For penal semiotics to cover the 
whole field of illegalities that one wishes to eliminate, all offences 
must be defined; they must be classified and collected into species 
from which none of them can escape. A code is therefore necessary 
and this code must be sufficiently precise for each type of offence to 
be clearly present in it. The silence of the law must not harbour the 
hope of impunity. An exhaustive, explicit code is required, defining 
crimes and fixing penalties. (On this theme, cf., among others, 
