tiary convent; the workers’ estate with the hospital and the prison). 
A continuity of the punitive criteria and mechanisms, which on the 
basis of a mere deviation gradually strengthened the rules and 
increased the punishment. A continuous gradation of the established, 
specialized and competent authorities (in the order of knowledge 
and in the order of power) which, without resort to arbitrariness, 
but strictly according to the regulations, by means of observation 
and assessment hierarchized, differentiated, judged, punished and 
moved gradually from the correction of irregularities to the punish¬ 
ment of crime. The ‘carceral’ with its many diffuse or compact 
forms, its institutions of supervision or constraint, of discreet sur¬ 
veillance and insistent coercion, assured the communication of 
punishments according to quality and quantity; it connected in 
series or disposed according to subtle divisions the minor and the 
serious penalties, the mild and the strict forms of treatment, bad 
marks and light sentences. You will end up in the convict-ship, the 
slightest indiscipline seems to say; and the harshest of prisons says 
to the prisoners condemned to life: I shall note the slightest irregu¬ 
larity in your conduct. The generality of the punitive function that 
the eighteenth century sought in the ‘ideological’ technique of 
representations and signs now had as its support the extension, the 
material framework, complex, dispersed, but coherent, of the various 
carceral mechanisms. As a result, a certain significant generality 
moved between the least irregularity and the greatest crime; it was no 
longer the offence, the attack on the common interest, it was the 
departure from the norm, the anomaly; it was this that haunted 
the school, the court, the asylum or the prison. It generalized in 
the sphere of meaning the function that the carceral generalized in the 
sphere of tactics. Replacing the adversary of the sovereign, the 
social enemy was transformed into a deviant, who brought with him 




Prison 


the multiple danger of disorder, crime and madness. The carceral 
network linked, through innumerable relations, the two long, 
multiple series of the punitive and the abnormal. 

2. The carceral, with its far-reaching networks, allows the re¬ 
cruitment of major ‘delinquents’. It organizes what might be called 
‘disciplinary careers’ in which, through various exclusions and 
rejections, a whole process is set in motion. In the classical period, 
there opened up in the confines or interstices of society the confused, 
tolerant and dangerous domain of the ‘outlaw’ or at least of that 
which eluded the direct hold of power: an uncertain space that was 
for criminality a training ground and a region of refuge; there 
poverty, unemployment, pursued innocence, cunning, the struggle 
