the intelligence and the heart crushed by forced labour at too tender 
an age’ (Za Fraternite, November 1845). But this criminality of need 
or of repression masks, by the attention paid to it and the disappro¬ 
bation surrounding it, another criminality that is sometimes its 
cause and always its extension. This is the delinquency from above, 
a scandalous example, the source of misery and the principle of 
revolt for the poor. ‘While misery strews your streets with corpses, 
and fills your prisons with thieves and murderers, where are the 
swindlers of the fashionable world.^ — The most corrupting 
examples, the most revolting cynicism, the most shameless robbery. 

... Are you not afraid that the poor man put into the dock for 


287 



Prison 


snatching a piece of bread from a baker’s stall will not, one day, 
become so enraged that stone by stone he will demolish the Stock 
Exchange, a wild den where the treasure of the state and the fortune 
of families are stolen with impunity?’ {La Ruche populaire, Novem¬ 
ber 1842). But this delinquency of wealth is tolerated by the laws, 
and, when it does find its way into the courts, it can depend upon 
the indulgence of the judges and the discretion of the press.*® Hence 
the idea that criminal trials may become the occasion for a political 
debate, that advantage should be taken of controversial trials or 
proceedings instituted against workers to denounce the general 
functioning of penal justice: ‘The courts are no longer as they once 
were a place for the exhibition of the miseries and wounds of the 
time, a kind of branding in which the sad victims of our social dis¬ 
order are displayed side by side; it is an arena that echoes with the 
cry of combatants’ {La Fraternite, November 1841). Hence, too, the 
idea that political prisoners, since they have, like delinquents, a 
direct experience of the penal system, but, unlike them, are in a 
position to be heard, have a duty to be the spokesmen of all pri¬ 
soners; it is their task to enlighten ‘the good bourgeois of France, 
who has never known the penalties inflicted through the pompous 
indictments of a public prosecutor’ {Almanack populaire de la 
France, 1839, 50). 

In this reappraisal of penal justice and of the frontier that it 
carefully traces around delinquency, the tactic of what might be 
called the ‘counter-_/a/r divers' is characteristic. What the workers’ 
newspapers do is to reverse the use that was made of crimes or trials 
in the newspapers which, like the Gaiette des tribunaux, ‘gorge 
themselves with blood’, ‘feed on prison’ and provide a daily ‘reper¬ 
toire of melodrama’ {Pauvre Jacques, ist year, no. 3). The counter¬ 
man divers systematically stresses the facts of delinquency in the 
bourgeoisie, showing that it is the class affected by ‘physical degen¬ 
eration’ and ‘moral decay’; for the accounts of crimes committed 
by ordinary people it substitutes descriptions of the misery into 
which their exploiters plunge them and who, literally, starve and 
murder them;*’ it points out in the criminal trials of workers what 
share of responsibility must be attributed to the employers and to 
society as a whole. In short, a whole effort was being made to 
reverse this monotonous discourse on crime, which sought both to 


288 



Illegalities and delinquency 


isolate it as a monstrosity and to depict it as the work of the poorest 
class. 

In the course of this anti-penal polemic, the Fourierists no doubt 
went further than any of the others. They were perhaps the first to 
elaborate a political theory which, at the same time, places a positive 
value on crime. Although, in their view, crime is a result of ‘civiliza¬ 
tion’, it is also, and by that very fact, a weapon against it. It bears 
within it a figure and a future. ‘The social order dominated by 
the fatality of its repressive principle continues to kill through the 
executioner or through the prisons those whose natural robustness 
rejects or disdains its prescriptions, those who, too strong to remain 
enclosed within its tight swaddling-clothes, break from them and 
tear them to pieces, men who do not wish to remain children’ (Za 
Phalange, lo January 1837). There is not, therefore, a criminal 
nature, but a play of forces which, according to the class to which 
individuals belong,*® will lead them to power or to prison: if bom 
poor, today’s magistrates would no doubt be in the convict-ships; 
and the convicts, if they had been well born, ‘would be presiding 
in the courts and dispensing justice’ {La Phalange, 1 December 
1838). At bottom, the existence of crime manifests ‘a fortunate 
irrepressibility of human nature’; it should be seen not so much as 
a weakness or a disease, as an energy that is reviving, an ‘outburst 
of protest in the name of human individuality’, which no doubt 
accounts for its strange power of fascination. ‘Without crime, which 
awakens in us a mass of torpid feelings and half distinguished 
passions, we would remain still longer in disorder, in weakness’ 
{La Phalange, 10 January 1837). It may be, therefore, that crime 
constitutes a political instrument that could prove as precious for 
the liberation of our society as it has been for the emancipation of 
the Negroes; indeed, will such an emancipation take place without 
