

should form from the malefactors that it gathers together a homo¬ 
geneous and interdependent population: ‘There exists at this moment 
among us an organized society of criminals ... They form a small 
nation within the greater. Almost all these men met or meet again 
in prison. We must now disperse the members of this society’ 
(Tocqueville, Rapport d la Ckamhre des Diputes, quoted in Beau¬ 
mont and Tocqueville, 392-3). Moreover, through the reflection 
that it gives rise to and the remorse that cannot fail to follow, 
solitude must be a positive instrument of reform: ‘Thrown into 
solitude, the convict reflects. Placed alone in the presence of his 
crime, he learns to hate it, and, if his soul is not yet blunted by evil, 
it is in isolation that remorse will come to assail him’ (Beaumont and 
Tocqueville, 109). Through the fact, too, that solitude assures a 
sort of self-regulation of the penalty and makes possible a spontane¬ 
ous individualization of the punishment: the more the convict is 
capable of reflecting, the more capable he was of committing his 
crime; but, also, the more lively his remorse, the more painful his 
solitude; on the other hand, when he has profoundly repented and 
made amends without the least dissimulation, solitude will no longer 
weigh upon him: ‘Thus, according to this admirable discipline, each 
intelligence and each morality bears within itself the principle and 
measure of a punishment whose error and human fallibility cannot 
alter the certainty and invariable equity ... Is it not in truth like 
the seal of a divine and providential justice.^’ (Aylies, 132-3). Lastly, 
and perhaps above all, the isolation of the convicts guarantees that 
it is possible to exercise over them, with maximum intensity, a 
power that will not be overthrown by any other influence; solitude 
is the primary condition of total submission: ‘Just imagine,’ said 
Charles Lucas, referring to the role of the governor, the instructor, 
the chaplain and other ‘charitable persons’ as regards the isolated 
convict, ‘just imagine the power of human speech intervening in 
the midst of the terrible discipline of silence to speak to the heart, 
to the soul, to the human person’ (Lucas, I, 167). Isolation provides 
an intimate exchange between the convict and the power that is 
exercised over him. 

It is at this point that the debate on the two American systems of 
imprisonment, that of Auburn and that of Philadelphia, was situated. 
In fact, this debate, which was so wide-ranging and long drawn out,* 


237 




Prison 

