become one of the major functions of our society. The judges of 
normality are present everywhere. We are in the society of the 
teacher-judge, the doctor-judge, the educator-judge, the ‘social 
worker’-judge; it is on them that the universal reign of the normative 
is based; and each individual, wherever he may find himself, subjects 
to it his body, his gestures, his behaviour, his aptitudes, his achieve¬ 
ments. The carceral network, in its compact or disseminated forms, 
with its systems of insertion, distribution, surveillance, observation, 
has been the greatest support, in modern society, of the normalizing 
power. 

5. The carceral texture of society assures both the real capture 
of the body and its perpetual observation; it is, by its very nature, 
the apparatus of punishment that conforms most completely to the 
new economy of power and the instrument for the formation of 
knowledge that this very economy needs. Its panoptic functioning 


304 



The carceral 


enables it to play this double role. By virtue of its methods of fixing, 
dividing, recording, it has been one of the simplest, crudest, also 
most concrete, but perhaps most indispensable conditions for the 
development of this immense activity of examination that has objec¬ 
tified human behaviour. If, after the age of ‘inquisitorial’ justice, we 
have entered the age of ‘examinatory’ justice, if, in an even more 
general way, the method of examination has been able to spread so 
widely throughout society, and to give rise in part to the sciences 
of man, one of the great instruments for this has been the multiplicity 
and close overlapping of the various mechanisms of incarceration. 
I am not saying that the human sciences emerged from the prison. 
But, if they have been able to be formed and to produce so many 
profound changes in the episteme, it is because they have been 
conveyed by a specific and new modality of power: a certain policy 
of the body, a certain way of rendering the group of men docile and 
useful. This policy required the involvement of definite relations of 
knowledge in relations of power; it called for a technique of over¬ 
lapping subjection and objectification; it brought with it new pro¬ 
cedures of individualization. The carceral network constituted one 
of the armatures of this power-knowledge that has made the human 
sciences historically possible. Knowable man (soul, individuality, 
consciousness, conduct, whatever it is called) is the object-effect 
of this analytical investment, of this domination-observation. 

6. This no doubt explains the extreme solidity of the prison, that 
slight invention that was nevertheless decried from the outset. If it 
had been no more than an instrument of rejection or repression in 
the service of a state apparatus, it would have been easier to alter its 
more overt forms or to find a more acceptable subsritute for it. But, 
rooted as it was in mechanisms and strategies of power, it could 
meet any attempt to transform it with a great force of inertia. One 
fact is characteristic: when it is a question of altering the system of 
imprisonment, opposition does not come from the judicial institu¬ 
tions alone; resistance is to be found not in the prison as penal sanc¬ 
tion, but in the prison with all its determinations, links and extra¬ 
judicial results; in the prison as the relay in a general network of 
disciplines and surveillances; in the prison as it functions in a panop¬ 
tic regime. This does not mean that it cannot be altered, nor that it 
is once and for all indispensable to our kind of society. One may, on 


305 




Prison 


the contrary, site the two processes which, in the very continuity of 
the processes that make the prison function, are capable of exercising 
considerable restraint on its use and of transforming its internal 
functioning. And no doubt these processes have already begun to a 
large degree. The first is that which reduces the utility (or increases 
its inconveniences) of a delinquency accommodated as a specific 
illegality, locked up and supervised; thus the growth of great 
national or international illegalities directly linked to the political 
and economic apparatuses (financial illegalities, information services, 
arms and drugs trafficking, property speculation) makes it clear that 
the somewhat rustic and conspicuous work force of delinquency is 
proving ineffective; or again, on a smaller scale, as soon as the 
economic levy on sexual pleasure is carried out more efficiently by 
the sale of contraceptives, or obliquely through publications, films 
or shows, the archaic hierarchy of prostitution loses much of its 
former usefulness. The second process is the growth of the disci¬ 
plinary networks, the multiplication of their exchanges with the 
penal apparatus, the ever more important powers that are given 
them, the ever more massive transference to them of judicial func¬ 
tions; now, as medicine, psychology, education, public assistance, 
‘social work’ assume an ever greater share of the powers of super¬ 
vision and assessment, the penal apparatus will be able, in turn, to 
become medicalized, psychologized, educationalized; and by the 
same token that turning-point represented by the prison becomes 
less useful when, through the gap between its penitentiary discourse 
and its effect of consolidating delinquency, it articulates the penal 
