

7 Bedtime at the reformatory of Mettray. Cf. p. 294. 





8 Lecture on the evils of alcoholism in the auditorium of Fresnes prison 











9 Steam machine for the celeriferous'correction of young boys and girls 'Fathers 
and Mothers. Uncles and Aunts. Guardian Masters and Mistresses of boarding 
schools and all those who have lazy, greedy, disobedient, rebellious insolent, 
quarrelsome, tale-bearing, chattering, irreligious children, or children having any 
other defect, are hereby informed that Mr Bogeyman and Mrs Bricabrac have lust set 
up in every rrra/rre of the city of Pans a machine similar to the one represented in this 
engraving and are ready to accept ail naughty children in need of correction in 
their establishments each day, from midday to two o’clock Mr Werewolf, Coalman 
Scarecrow, Eat-without- Hunger and Mrs Wildcat, Spiteful Slag and Drink-without- 
Thirst, friends and relations of Mr Bogeyman and Mrs Bricabrac, will, for a small sum, 
set up similar machines to be sent into provincial towns and will themselves supervise 
their operation The cheapness of correction given by the steam machine and the 
surprising effects that it produces will persuade parents to avail themselves of it as 
often as the bad behaviour of their children will require it We also take incorrigible 
children as boarders, they are fed on bread and water' Engraving of the late 
eighteenth century (Collections historiquesdel'I.N R.D P.). 





. ■ .i '-'.V’A'''.': 

'i'S 

■i. ‘h, 


10 N Andty.L'orthopidieoul'artdepreveniretdecorrigerdans 
/es enfants /as difformites du corps (Orthopaedics or the art 
of preventing and correcting deformities of the body in 
children). 1749. 









2. The means of correct training 


At the beginning of the seventeenth century, Walhausen spoke of 
‘strict discipline’ as an art of correct training. The chief function of 
the disciplinary power is to ‘train’, rather than to select and to levy; 
or, no doubt, to train in order to levy and select all the more. It does 
not link forces together in order to reduce them; it seeks to bind them 
together in such a way as to multiply and use them. Instead of bend¬ 
ing ail its subjects into a single uniform mass, it separates, analyses, 
differentiates, carries its procedures of decomposition to the point of 
necessary and sufficient single units. It ‘trains’ the moving, confused, 
useless multitudes of bodies and forces into a multiplicity of indivi¬ 
dual elements - small, separate cells, organic autonomies, genetic 
identities and continuities, combinatory segments. Discipline 
‘makes’ individuals; it is the specific technique of a power that 
regards individuals both as objects and as instruments of its exercise. 
It is not a triumphant power, which because of its own excess can 
pride itself on its omnipotence; it is a modest, suspicious power, 
which functions as a calculated, but permanent economy. These 
are humble modalities, minor procedures, as compared with the 
majestic rituals of sovereignty or the great apparatuses of the state. 
And it is precisely they that were gradually to invade the major 
forms, altering their mechanisms and imposing their procedures. The 
legal apparatus was not to escape this scarcely secret invasion. The 
success of disciplinary power derives no doubt from the use of simple 
instruments; hierarchical observation, normalizing judgement and 
their combination in a procedure that is specific to it, the examination. 

Hierarchical observation 

The exercise of discipline presupposes a mechanism that coerces by 
means of observation; an apparatus in which the techniques that 


170 



