dishonoured, occupied the manufactory and forced the employer to 
abandon his project (cf. Aguet, 30-31). There was also a widespread 
press campaign in the workers’ newspapers: on the theme that the 
government encouraged penal labour in order to reduce ‘free’ wages; 
on the theme that the inconveniences of these prison workshops 
were even more evident for women, who were thus deprived of their 
labour, driven to prostitution and therefore to prison, where these 
same women, who could no longer work when they were free, then 
competed with those who were still at work {UAtelier, 3rd year, 
no. 4, December 1842); on the theme that prisoners were given the 
safest jobs - ‘in warm and sheltered conditions thieves execute the 
work of hat-making and cabinet-making’, while the unemployed 
hatter is forced to go ‘to the human slaughter-house to make white- 
lead at two francs a day’ {L’Atelier, 6th year, no. 2, November 1845); 
on the theme that philanthropy is more concerned about the work¬ 
ing conditions of prisoners than those of free workers: ‘We are sure 
that if prisoners worked with mercury, for example, science would 
be a great deal more ready than it is to find ways of protecting the 
workers from the dangers of its fumes: “Those poor convicts.^” 
someone would exclaim, who scarcely has a word for the gilders. 
But what can you expect? One has to have killed or robbed to 
arouse compassion or interest.’ On the theme above all that, if the 
prison was tending to become a workshop, it would not be long 
before beggars and the unemployed were sent there, thus reconsti¬ 
tuting the old hopitaux giniraux of France or the workhouses of 
England. In addition, there were petitions and letters, especially 
after the law of 1844 - one petition, rejected by the Chambre de 
Paris, ‘found inhuman that one should propose to apply murderers 
and thieves to work that is today the lot of a few thousand workers’; 
‘the Chambre preferred Barrabas to us’ {L’Atelier, 4th year, no. 9, 
June 1844 and 5th year, no. 7, April 1845; cf. also, of the same 
period. La Democratie pacifique)-, typographical workers sent a 
letter to the minister when they learnt that a printing-works was to 
be set up in the prison at Melun: ‘You have decided between 
reprobates justly punished by the law and citizens who sacrifice 


241 




Prison 


their days, in abstinence and probity, to the lives of their families and 
to the wealth of their nation’ {L’Atelier, 5th year, no. 6, March 1845). 

The answers given by the government and the administration to 
this whole campaign changed very little. Penal labour cannot be 
