To sum up, it might be said that discipline creates out of the 
bodies it controls four types of individuality, or rather an individual¬ 
ity that is endowed with four characteristics: it is cellular (by the 
play of spatial distribution), it is organic (by the coding of activities), 
it is genetic (by the accumulation of time), it is combinatory (by the 
composition of forces). And, in doing so, it operates four great 
techniques; it draws up tables; it prescribes movements; it imposes 
exercises; lastly, in order to obtain the combination of forces, it 
arranges ‘tactics’. Tactics, the art of constructing, with located 
bodies, coded activities and trained aptitudes, mechanisms in which 
the product of the various forces is increased by their calculated 
combination are no doubt the highest form of disciplinary practice. 
In this knowledge, the eighteenth-century theoreticians saw the 
general foundation of all military practice, from the control and 
exercise of individual bodies to the use of forces specific to the most 
complex multiplicities. The architecture, anatomy, mechanics, 
economy of the disciplinary body: ‘In the eyes of most soldiers. 


167 




Discipline 


tactics are only a branch of the vast science of war; for me, they are 
the base of this science; they are this science itself, because they 
teach how to constitute troops, order them, move them, get them to 
fight; because tactics alone may make up for numbers, and handle 
the multitude; lastly, it will include knowledge of men, weapons, 
tensions, circumstances, because it is all these kinds of knowledge 
brought together that must determine those movements’ (Guibert, 
4). Or again: ‘The term tactics ... gives some idea of the respective 
position of the men who make up a particular troop in rela¬ 
tion to that of the different troops that make up an army, their 
movements and their actions, their relations with one another’ (Joly 
de Maizeroy, 2). 

It may be that war as strategy is a continuation of politics. But it 
must not be forgotten that ‘politics’ has been conceived as a con¬ 
tinuation, if not exactly and directly of war, at least of the military 
model as a fundamental means of preventing civil disorder. Politics, 
as a technique of internal peace and order, sought to implement the 
mechanism of the perfect army, of the disciplined mass, of the docile, 
useful troop, of the regiment in camp and in the field, on manoeu¬ 
vres and on exercises. In the great eighteenth-century states, the 
army guaranteed civil peace no doubt because it was a real force, 
an ever-threatening sword, but also because it was a technique and a 
