visible and ‘telling’ penalties. Imprisonment is envisaged, but as one 
among other penalties; it is the specific punishment for certain 
oflFences, those that infringe the liberty of individuals (such as 
abduction) or those that result from an abuse of liberty (disorder, 
violence). It is also envisaged as a condition to enable certain 
punishments to be carried out (forced labour, for example). But it 
does not cover the whole field of penality with its duration as the 
sole principle of variation. Or rather, the idea of penal imprison¬ 
ment is explicitly criticized by many reformers. Because it is 
incapable of corresponding to the specificity of crimes. Because it 
has no effect on the public. Because it is useless, even harmful, to 
society: it is costly, it maintains convicts in idleness, it multiplies 
their vices (cf. Archives parlementaires, XXVI, 712). Because the 
execution of such a penalty is difficult to supervise and because there 
is a risk of exposing prisoners to the arbitrary will of their guards. 
Because the job of depriving a man of his liberty and of supervising 
him is an exercise of tyranny. ‘You are demanding that there should 
be monsters among you; and if these odious men existed, the legisla¬ 
tor ought perhaps to treat them as murderers’ (Mably, 338). Prison 
as the universal penalty is incompatible with this whole technique 
of penalty-effect, penalty-representation, penalty-general function. 




The gentle way in punishment 

penalty-sign and discourse. It is obscurity, violence and suspicion. 
‘It is a place of darkness in which the citizen’s eye cannot count the 
victims, in which consequently their number is lost as an example. 
... Whereas if, without multiplying crimes, one could multiply the 
example of punishments, one would succeed at last in rendering 
them less necessary; indeed, the obscurity of the prisons becomes 
a subject of defiance for the citizens; they easily suppose that great 
injustices are committed there. . . There is certainly something 
wrong when the law, which is made for the good of the multitude, 
instead of arousing its gratitude, continually arouses its discontent’ 
(Dufriche de Valaze, 344-5). 

The idea that imprisonment might as it does today cover the 
whole middle ground of punishment, between death and light 
penalties, was one that the reformers could not arrive at immediately. 

The problem is the following: within a short space of time, 
detention became the essential form of punishment. In the penal 
code of 1810, between death and fines, it occupies, in a number of 
forms, almost the whole field of possible punishments. ‘What is the 
system of penality accepted by the new law.^ It is incarceration in all 
its forms. Indeed, compare the four principal penalties that remain 
in the penal code. Forced labour is a form of incarceration. The 
