their place among the contemporary techniques of classification and 
tabulation; but also how they introduced into them the specific 
problem of individuals and multiplicity. Similarly, the disciplinary 
controls of activity belonged to a whole series of researches, theor¬ 
etical or practical, into the natural machinery of bodies; but they 
began to discover in them specific processes; behaviour and its 
organized requirements gradually replaced the simple physics of 
movement. The body, required to be docile in its minutest opera¬ 
tions, opposes and shows the conditions of functioning proper to an 
organism. Disciplinary power has as its correlative an individuality 
that is not only analytical and ‘cellular’, but also natural and 
‘organic’. 


The organiiation of geneses 

In 1667, the edict that set up the manufactory of the Gobelins 
envisaged the organization of a school. Sixty scholarship children 
were to be chosen by the superintendent of royal buildings, entrus¬ 
ted for a time to a master whose task it would be to provide them 
with ‘upbringing and instruction’, then apprenticed to the various 
master tapestry makers of the manufactory (who by virtue of this 
fact received compensation deducted from the pupils’ scholarships); 
after six years’ apprenticeship, four years of service and a qualifying 
examination, they were given the right to ‘set up and run a shop’ 
in any town of the kingdom. We find here the characteristics of 
guild apprenticeship: the relation of dependence on the master that 
is both individual and total; the statutory duration of the training, 
which is concluded by a qualifying examination, but which is not 
broken down according to a precise programme; an overall exchange 
between the master who must give his knowledge and the appren¬ 
tice who must offer his services, his assistance and often some pay¬ 
ment. The form of domestic service is mixed with a transference of 
knowledge.® In 1737, an edict organized a school of drawing for 
the apprentices of the Gobelins; it was not intended to replace the 
training given by the master workers, but to complement it. It 
involved a quite different arrangement of time. Two hours a day, 
except on Sundays and feast days, the pupils met in the school. A 


136 




Docile bodies 


roll-call was taken, from a list on the wall; the absentees were noted 
down in a register. The school was divided into three classes. The 
first for those who had no notion of drawing; they were made to 
copy models, which were more or less difficult according to the 
abilities of each pupil. The second ‘for those who already have some 
principles’, or who had passed through the first class; they had to 
reproduce pictures ‘at sight, without tracing’, but considering only 
the drawing. In the third class, they learnt colouring and pastel 
drawing, and were introduced to the theory and practice of dyeing. 
The pupils performed individual tasks at regular intervals; each of 
these exercises, signed with the name of its author and date of 
execution, was handed in to the teacher; the best were rewarded; 
assembled together at the end of the year and compared, they made 
it possible to establish the progress, the present ability and the 
relative place of each pupil; it was then decided which of them could 
pass into the next class. A general book, kept by the teachers and 
their assistants, recorded from day to day the behaviour of the 
pupils and everything that happened in the school; it was periodically 
shown to an inspector (Gerspach, 1892). 

The Gobelins school is only one example of an important pheno¬ 
menon: the development, in the classical period, of a new technique 
for taking charge of the time of individual existences; for regulating 
the relations of time, bodies and forces; for assuring an accumula¬ 
tion of duration; and for turning to ever-increased profit or use the 
movement of passing time. How can one capitalize the time of 
individuals, accumulate it in each of them, in their bodies, in their 
forces or in their abilities, in a way that is susceptible of use and 
control.^ How can one organize profitable durations.^ The disciplines, 
which analyse space, break up and rearrange activities, must also be 
understood as machinery for adding up and capitalizing time. This 
was done in four ways, which emerge most clearly in military 
organization. 

I. Divide duration into successive or parallel segments, each of 
which must end at a specific time. For example, isolate the period 
of training and the period of practice; do not mix the instruction of 
recruits and the exercise of veterans; open separate military schools 
for the armed service (in 1764, the creation of the Fcole Militaire in 
Paris, in 1776 the creation of twelve schools in the provinces); 


157 




Discipline 

recruit professional soldiers at the youngest possible age, take 
children, ‘have them adopted by the nation, and brought up in 
special schools’ (Servan, J., 456); teach in turn posture, marching, 
