punitive system, at the threshold of the contemporary period. De¬ 
scribing them will require great attention to detail: beneath every set 
of figures, we must seek not a meaning, but a precaution; we must 
situate them not only in the inextricability of a functioning, but in 
the coherence of a tactic. They are the acts of cunning, not so much 
of the greater reason that works even in its sleep and gi\^es meaning 
to the insignificant, as of the attentive ‘malevolence’ that turns 
everything to account. Discipline is a political anatomy of detail. 

Before we lose patience we would do well to recall the words of 
Marshal de Saxe: ‘Although those who concern themselves with 
details are regarded as folk of limited intelligence, it seems to me 
that this part is essential, because it is the foundation, and it is 
impossible to erect any building or establish any method without 
understanding its principles. It is not enough to have a liking for 
architecture. One must also know stone-cutting’ (Saxe, 5). There is 
a whole history to be written about such ‘stone-cutting’ - a history 
of the utilitarian rationalization of detail in moral accountability and 
political control. The classical age did not initiate it; rather it 
accelerated it, changed its scale, gave it precise instruments, and 
perhaps found some echoes for it in the calculation of the infinitely 
small or in the description of the most detailed characteristics of 
natural beings. In any case, ‘detail’ had long been a category of 


139 



Discipline 


theology and asceticism; every detail is important since, in the sight 
of God, no immensity is greater than a detail, nor is anything so 
small that it was not willed by one of his individual wishes. In this 
great tradition of the eminence of detail, all the minutiae of Chris¬ 
tian education, of scholastic or military pedagogy, all forms of 
‘training’ found their place easily enough. For the disciplined man, 
as for the true believer, no detail is unimportant, but not so much 
for the meaning that it conceals within it as for the hold it provides 
for the power that wishes to seize it. Characteristic is the great hymn 
to the ‘little things’ and to their eternal importance, sung by Jean- 
Baptiste de La Salle, in his Traite sur les obligations des freres des 
Nicoles chretiennes. The mystique of the everyday is joined here with 
the discipline of the minute. ‘How dangerous it is to neglect little 
things. It is a very consoling reflection for a soul like mine, little 
disposed to great actions, to think that fidelity to little things may, 
by an imperceptible progress, raise us to the most eminent sanctity: 
because little things lead to greater... Little things; it will be said, 
alas, my God, what can we do that is great for you, weak and mortal 
creatures that we are. Little things; if great things presented them¬ 
selves would we perform them? Would we not think them beyond 
our strength? Little things; and if God accepts them and wishes to 
receive them as great things? Little things; has one ever felt this? 
Does one judge according to experience? Little things; one is cer¬ 
tainly guilty, therefore, if seeing them as such, one refuses them? 
Little things; yet it is they that in the end have made great saints! 
Yes, little things; but great motives, great feelings, great fervour, 
great ardour, and consequently great merits, great treasures, great 
rewards’ (La Salle, Traite ..., 238-9). The meticulousness of 
the regulations, the fussiness of the inspections, the supervision of 
the smallest fragment of life and of the body will soon provide, in the 
context of the school, the barracks, the hospital or the workshop, 
a laicized content, an economic or technical rationality for this 
mystical calculus of the infinitesimal and the infinite. And a History 
of Detail in the eighteenth century, presided over by Jean-Baptiste 
de La Salle, touching on Leibniz and Buffbn, via Frederick II, 
covering pedagogy, medicine, military tactics and economics, 
should bring us, at the end of the century, to the man who dreamt 
of being another Newton, not the Newton of the immensities of 


140 



Docile bodies 


the heavens and the planetary masses, but a Newton of ‘small 
bodies’, small movements, small actions; to the man who replied 
to Monge’s remark, ‘there was only one world to discover’: ‘What 
do I hear? But the world of details, who has never dreamt of that 
other world, what of that world? I have believed in it ever since I 
was fifteen. I was concerned with it then, and this memory lives 
within me, as an obsession never to be abandoned. . . That other 
world is the most important of all that I flatter myself I have dis¬ 
covered: when I think of it, my heart aches’ (these words are 
attributed to Bonaparte in the Introduction to Saint-Hilaire’s 
Notions synthitiques et historiques de pkilosophie naturelle). Napoleon 
did not discover this world; but we know that he set out to organize 
it; and he wished to arrange around him a mechanism of power that 
would enable him to see the smallest event that occurred in the state 
he governed; he intended, by means of the rigorous discipline that he 
imposed, ‘to embrace the whole of this vast machine without the 
slightest detail escaping his attention’ (Treilhard, 14). 

A meticulous observation of detail, and at the same time a 
political awareness of these small things, for the control and use of 
men, emerge through the classical age bearing with them a whole 
