and an execution: small, but innumerable ‘disturbances around the 
scaffold’. 

In their most elementary forms, these disturbances began with the 
shouts of encouragement, sometimes the cheering, that accompanied 
the condemned man to his execution. Throughout the long proces¬ 
sion, he was sustained by ‘the compassion of the meek and tender¬ 
hearted, and with the applause, admiration and envy of all the bold 
and hardened’ (Fielding, 449). If the crowd gathered round the 
scaffold, it was not simply to witness the sufferings of the condemned 
man or to excite the anger of the executioner: it was also to hear an 
individual who had nothing more to lose curse the judges, the laws, 
the government and religion. The public execution allowed the 
luxury of these momentary saturnalia, when nothing remained to 
prohibit or to punish. Under the protection of imminent death, the 
criminal could say everything and the crowd cheered. ‘If there were 
annals in which the last words of the tortured and executed were 
scrupulously recorded, and if one had the courage to read through 
them, even if one did no more than question the vile populace that 
gathers around the scaffolds out of cruel curiosity, one would be told 
that no one who had died on the wheel did not accuse heaven for the 
misery that brought him to the crime, reproach his judges for their 
barbarity, curse the minister of the altars who accompanies them 
and blaspheme against the God whose organ he is’ (Boucher 


60 




The spectacle of the scaffold 


d’Argis, 128-9). 1*1 these executions, which ought to show only the 
terrorizing power of the prince, there was a whole aspect of the 
carnival, in which rules were inverted, authority mocked and 
criminals transformed into heroes. The shame was turned round; 
the courage, like the tears and the cries of the condemned, caused 
offence only to the law. Fielding notes with regret: ‘To unite the 
ideas of death and shame is not so easy as may be imagined ... I 
will appeal to any man who hath seen an execution, or a procession 
to an execution; let him tell me. When he hath beheld a poor 
wretch, bound in a cart, just on the verge of eternity, all pale and 
trembling with his approaching fate, whether the idea of shame 
hath ever intruded on his mind.^ much less will the bold daring 
rogue, who glories in his present condition, inspire the beholder 
with any such sensation’ (Fielding, 450). For the people who are 
there and observe, there is always, even in the most extreme ven¬ 
geance of the sovereign a pretext for revenge. 

This was especially the case if the conviction was regarded as 
unjust - or if one saw a man of the people put to death, for a crime 
that would have merited, for someone better born or richer, a com¬ 
paratively light penalty. It would seem that certain practices of penal 
justice were no longer supported in the eighteenth century - and 
perhaps .for longer - by the lower strata of the population. This 
would explain why executions could easily lead to the beginnings 
of social disturbances. Since the poorest - it was a magistrate who 
made the observation (Dupaty, 1786, 247) - could not be heard in 
the courts of law, it was where the law was manifested publicly, 
where they were called upon to act as witnesses and almost as co¬ 
adjutors of this law, that they could intervene, physically: enter by 
force into the punitive mechanism and redistribute its effects; take 
up in another sense the violence of the punitive rituals. There was 
agitation against the difference in p>enalties according to social class: 
in 1781, the parish priest of Champre had been killed by the lord 
of the manor, and an attempt was made to declare the murderer 
insane; ‘the peasants, who were extremely attached to their pastor, 
were furious and had at first seemed ready to lay violent hands upon 
their lord and to set fire to the castle. . . Everyone protested, and 
rightly, against the indulgence of the minister who deprived justice 
of the means of punishing so abominable a crime’ (Hardy, IV, 394). 


61 



Torture 


There was agitation, too, against the excessive sentences passed on 
certain common offences that were not regarded as serious (such as 
house-breaking); or against punishments for certain offences con¬ 
nected with social conditions such as petty larceny; the death penalty 
for this crime aroused a great deal of discontent, because there were 
many domestic servants in a single household and it was difficult 
for them, in such a case, to prove their innocence, and also because 
they could easily be victims of their employers’ spite and because 
the indulgence of certain masters who shut their eyes to such 
behaviour made the fate of servants accused, condemned and hanged 
even more iniquitous. The execution of such servants often gave 
rise to protests (cf. Hardy, I, 319, 367; III, 227-8; IV, 180). There 
was a small riot in Paris in 1761 in favour of a servant woman who 
had stolen a piece of cloth from her master. Despite the fact that the 
woman admitted her guilt, handed back the material and begged for 
mercy, the master refused to withdraw his complaint; on the day 
of the execution, the local people prevented the hanging, invaded the 
merchant’s shop and looted it; in the end, the servant was pardoned, 
