principle would no longer be the mobile or immobile mass, but a 
geometry of divisible segments whose basic unity was the mobile 
soldier with his rifle;'^ and, no doubt, below the soldier himself, the 
minimal gestures, the elementary stages of actions, the fragments of 
spaces occupied or traversed. 

The same problems arose when it was a question of constituting 
a productive force whose effect had to be superior to the sum of 
elementary forces that composed it: ‘The combined working-day 
produces, relatively to an equal sum of working-days, a greater 
quantity of use-values, and, consequently, diminishes the labour¬ 
time necessary for the production of a given useful effect. Whether 
the combined working-day, in a given case, acquires this increased 
productive power, because it heightens the mechanical force of 
labour, or extends its sphere of action over a greater space, or con¬ 
tracts the field of production relatively to the scale of production, 
or at the critical moment sets large masses of labour to work... the 
special productive power of the combined working-day is, under 
all circumstances, the social productive power of labour, or the 
productive power of social labour. This power is due to cooperation 
itself’ (Marx, Capital, vol. i, 311-12). On several occasions, Marx 
stresses the analogy between the problems of the division of labour 
and those of military tactics. For example: ‘Just as the offensive 
power of a squadron of cavalry, or the defensive power of a regi¬ 
ment of infantry, is essentially different from the sum of the offen¬ 
sive or defensive powers of the individual cavalry or infantry 


163 



Discipline 


soldiers taken separately, so the sum total of the mechanical forces 
exerted by isolated workmen differs from the social force that is 
developed, when many hands take part simultaneously in one and 
the same undivided operation’ (Marx, Capital, vol. i, 308). 

Thus a new demand appears to which discipline must respond: to 
construct a machine whose effect will be maximized by the concerted 
articulation of the elementary parts of which it is composed. Disci¬ 
pline is no longer simply an art of distributing bodies, of extracting 
time from them and accumulating it, but of composing forces in 
order to obtain an efficient machine. This demand is expressed in 
several ways. 

1. The individual body becomes an element that may be placed, 
moved, articulated on others. Its bravery or its strength are no 
