aJ continendos homines, non ad puniendos, as the tag has it; in this 
sense, the imprisonment of a suspect has a role similar to that of a 
debtor. Through imprisonment, one has security for someone, one 
does not punish him.* This was the general principle. And although 
imprisonment sometimes served as a penalty, even in important 
cases, it did so essentially as a substitute: it replaced the galleys for 
those - women, children, invalids - who could not serve there: ‘The 
sentence of imprisonment for a term or for life is equivalent to being 
sent to the galleys.’® In this equivalence, one can see clearly enough 
the emergence of a possible connection. But, for this to take place, 
the prison had to change its juridical status. 

It was also necessary to overcome a second obstacle, which, for 


118 




The gentle way in punishment 


France at least, was a considerable one. Imprisonment was especially 
disqualified for this role by the fact that it was, in practice, directly 
bound up with arbitrary royal decision and the excesses of the 
sovereign power. The 'maisons de force, the general hospitals, the 
‘king’s orders’ or the orders of the police magistrates, letters under 
the king’s private seal obtained by notables or by families, con¬ 
stituted a whole repressive practice, juxtaposed with ‘regular justice’ 
and more usually opposed to it. And this extra-judicial imprison¬ 
ment came to be rejected by both classical jurists and reformers. 
Prisons are made by princes, said a traditionalist like Serpillon, who 
sheltered behind the authority of Judge Bouhier: ‘Although, for 
reasons of state, princes are sometimes inclined to inflict this penalty, 
ordinary justice makes no use of this kind of sentence’ (Serpillon, 
1095). Detention was described by the reformers in innumerable 
statements as a figure and privileged instrument of despotism: ‘What 
is one to say of those secret prisons conjured up by the fatal spirit of 
monarchism, reserved in the main either for philosophers, in whose 
hands nature has placed her torch and who dared to enlighten their 
century, or for those proud independent souls who lack the coward¬ 
ice to keep silent on the ills of their country; prisons whose gloomy 
doors are opened by mysterious letters and swallow up forever its 
unfortunate victims.^ What is to be said even of those letters, those 
masterpieces of ingenious tyranny, which overthrow the privilege 
of every citizen to be heard before he is judged, and which are a 
thousand times more dangerous for men than the invention of 
Phalaris .. .’* (Brissot, 173). 

