of the population from which they sprang and with which they 
remained linked has been a difficult task, especially no doubt in 
urban milieux.®^ It has been a long and arduous undertaking. It has 
involved the use of the general principles of the ‘moralization’ of the 
poorer classes that elsewhere has had such crucial importance both 
from an economic and a political point of view (the acquisition of 
what might be called a ‘basic legalism’, which was indispensable 
from the time when custom was replaced by the system of the code; 
learning the elementary rules of property and thrift; training in 
docility at work, in stability of residence and of the family, etc.). 
More specific methods were used to maintain the hostility of the 
poorer classes to delinquents (the use of ex-convicts as informers, 
police spies, strike-breakers or thugs). There has been a systematic 
confusion between offences against common law and those offences 


285 



Prison 


against the severe legislation concerning the livret (work record), 
strikes, coalitions, associations,*® for which the workers demanded 
political status. Workers’ action was regularly accused of being 
animated, if not manipulated, by mere criminals (cf., for example. 
Monfalcon, 142). Verdicts were often more severe against workers 
than against thieves (cf. L'Atelier, October 1840, or La Fraternite, 
July-August 1847). The two categories of convict were mixed in 
the prisons and preferential treatment given to common-law 
offenders, while convicted journalists and politicians usually enjoyed 
the right to separate treatment. In short, a whole tactic of confusion 
aimed at maintaining a permanent state of conflict. 

To this was added a patient attempt to impose a highly specific 
grid on the common perception of delinquents: to present them as 
close by, everywhere present and everywhere to be feared. This was 
the function of the_/a/t divers, which invaded a part of the press and 
which began to have its own newspapers.** The criminal divers, 
by its everyday redundancy, makes acceptable the system of judicial 
and police supervisions that partition society; it recounts from day 
to day a sort of internal battle against the faceless enemy; in this war, 
it constitutes the daily bulletin of alarm or victory. The crime novel, 
which began to develop in the broadsheet and in mass-circulation 
literature, assumed an apparently opposite role. Above all, its func¬ 
tion was to show that the delinquent belonged to an entirely different 
world, unrelated to familiar, everyday life. This strangeness was first 
that of the lower depths of society {Les Myst'eres de Paris, Rocam¬ 
bole), then that of madness (especially in the latter half of the cen¬ 
tury) and lastly that of crime in high society (Arsene Lupin). The 
combination of the fait divers and the detective novel has produced 
for the last hundred years or more an enormous mass of ‘crime 
stories’ in which delinquency appears both as very close and quite 
alien, a perpetual threat to everyday life, but extremely distant in its 
origin and motives, both everyday and exotic in the milieu in which 
it takes place. Through the importance attributed to it and the 
surfeit of discourse surrounding it, a line is traced round it which, 
while exalting it, sets it apart. In such a formidable delinquency, 
coming from so alien a clime, what illegality could recognize itself.^... 

This multiple tactic had its effect: this is proved by the campaign 
of the workers’ newspapers against penal labour;** against the ‘com- 


286 



Illegalities and delinquency 


fort of the prisons’ and for giving prisoners the hardest and most 
dangerous work; against the excessive interest shown by philan¬ 
thropists in the delinquents; against the literature that exalts crime;®* 
it is also proved by the general mistrust felt throughout the workers’ 
movement for former common-law convicts. ‘At the dawn of the 
twentieth century,’ writes Mich^e Perrot, ‘surrounded by contempt, 
the highest of walls, the prison finally closed in on an unpopular 
people’ (Perrot). 

Yet it certainly cannot be said that this tactic triumphed or that 
it brought about a total break between the delinquents and the lower 
classes. The relations between the poorer classes and illegality, the 
reciprocal position of the proletariat and the urban plebs has yet to 
be studied. But one thing is certain: delinquency and repression 
were regarded, in the workers’ movements of the years 1830-50, 
as an important issue. There was no doubt hostility towards the 
delinquents; but it was a battle around penality. The workers’ news¬ 
papers often proposed a political analysis of criminality that con¬ 
tradicted term by term the description familiar to the philanthropists 
(poverty - dissipation - laziness - drunkenness - vice - theft - 
crime). They assigned the origin of delinquency not to the indivi¬ 
dual criminal (he was merely the occasion or the first victim), but 
to society: ‘The man who kills you is not free not to kill you. It is 
society or, to be more precise, bad social organization that is 
responsible’ {UHumanitaire, August 1841). This is so either because 
society is incapable of providing its fundamental needs, or because 
it destroys or effaces in him possibilities, aspirations or needs that 
later emerge in crime: ‘Bad education, unused aptitudes and forces, 
