rational foundation for a penal arithmetic? Between the contractual 
principle that expels the criminal from society and the image of the 
monster ‘vomited’ by nature, where is one to find a limit, if not in a 
human nature that is manifested - not in the rigour of the law, 
not in the ferocity of the delinquent - but in the sensibility 
of the reasonable man who makes the law and does not commit 
crime? 

But this recourse to ‘sensibility’ does not exactly express a 
theoretical impossibility. In fact, it bears within it a principle of 
calculation. The body, the imagination, pain, the heart to be re¬ 
spected are not, in effect, those of the criminal that is to be punished, 
but those of the men who, having subscribed to the pact, have the 
right of exercising against him the power of assembly. The pain that 
must exclude any reduction in punishment is that felt by the judges 
or spectators with all the hardness of heart that it may bring with it, 
all the ferocity induced by familiarity, or on the contrary, ill- 
founded feelings of pity and indulgence; ‘Thank God for those 
gentle, sensitive souls on whom those horrible executions exert a 
kind of torture’ (Lacretelle, 131). What has to be arranged and 
calculated are the return effects of punishment on the punishing 
authority and the power that it claims to exercise. 


91 




Punishment 


Here the principle takes root that one should never apply ‘in¬ 
humane’ punishments to a criminal, who, nevertheless, may well be 
a traitor and a monster. If the law must now treat in a ‘humane’ way 
an individual who is ‘outside nature’ (whereas the old justice treated 
the ‘outlaw’ inhumanely), it is not on account of some profound 
humanity that the criminal conceals within him, but because of a 
necessary regulation of the effects of power. It is this ‘economic’ 
rationality that must calculate the penalty and prescribe the appro¬ 
priate techniques. ‘Humanity’ is the respectable name given to this 
economy and to its meticulous calculations. ‘Where punishment is 
concerned, the minimum is ordered by humanity and counselled by 
policy.’* 

So, in order to understand this techno-politics of punishment, let 
us take the extreme case, the ultimate crime: a deed of such enormity 
that it violates all the most respected laws. It is produced in circum¬ 
stances so extraordinary, in such profound secrecy, with such lack 
of restraint, as if at the very limit of possibility, that it could not 
