whose essential function is to refer, not to a set of observable 
phenomena, but to a corpus of laws and texts that must be remem¬ 
bered; that operates not by differentiating individuals, but by 
specifying acts according to a number of general categories; not by 
hierarchizing, but quite simply by bringing into play the binary 
opposition of the permitted and the forbidden; not by homogeniz¬ 
ing, but by operating the division, acquired once and for all, of 
condemnation. The disciplinary mechanisms secreted a ‘penality of 
the norm’, which is irreducible in its principles and functioning to 
the traditional penality of the law. The minor court that seems to sit 
permanently in the buildings of discipline, and which sometimes 
assumes the theatrical form of the great legal apparatus, must not 
mislead us: it does not bring, except for a few formal remnants, the 
mechanisms of criminal justice to the web of everyday existence; or 
at least that is not its essential role; the disciplines created - drawing 
on a whole series of very ancient procedures — a new functioning 
of punishment, and it was this that gradually invested the great 
external apparatus that it seemed to reproduce in either a modest or 
an ironic way. The juridico-anthropological functioning revealed in 
the whole history of modern penality did not originate in the super¬ 
imposition of the human sciences on criminal justice and in the 
requirements proper to this new rationality or to the humanism that 
it appeared to bring with it; it originated in the disciplinary tech¬ 
nique that operated these new mechanisms of normalizing 
judgement. 


183 




Discipline 


The power of the Norm appears through the disciplines. Is this 
the new law of modern society.^ Let us say rather that, since the 
eighteenth century, it has joined other powers - the Law, the Word 
{Parole) and the Text, Tradition - imposing new delimitations upon 
them. The Normal is established as a principle of coercion in teach¬ 
ing with the introduction of a standardized education and the 
establishment of the dcoles norrrutles (teachers’ training colleges); it 
is established in the effort to organize a national medical profession 
and a hospital system capable of operating general norms of health; 
it is established in the standardization of industrial processes and 
products (on this topic, one should refer to the important contribu¬ 
tion of Canguilhem, 171-91). Like surveillance and with it, normal¬ 
ization becomes one of the great instruments of power at the end of 
the classical age. For the marks that once indicated status, privilege 
and affiliation were increasingly replaced - or at least supplemented 
— by a whole range of degrees of normality indicating membership 
of a homogeneous social body but also playing a part in classifica¬ 
tion, hierarchization and the distribution of rank. In a sense, the 
power of normalization imposes homogeneity; but it individualizes 
by making it possible to measure gaps, to determine levels, to fix 
specialities and to render the differences useful by fitting them one 
to another. It is easy to understand how the power of the norm 
functions within a system of formal equality, since within a homo¬ 
geneity that is the rule, the norm introduces, as a useful imperative 
and as a result of measurement, all the shading of individual 
differences. 


The examination 

The examination combines the techniques of an observing hierarchy 
and those of a normalizing judgement. It is a normalizing gaze, a 
surveillance that makes it possible to qualify, to classify and to 
punish. It establishes over individuals a visibility through which 
one differentiates them and judges them. That is why, in all the 
mechanisms of discipline, the examination is highly ritualized. In it 
are combined the ceremony of power and the form of the experi¬ 
ment, the deployment of force and the establishment of truth. At the 
heart of the procedures of discipline, it manifests the subjection of 


184 




The means of correct training 


those who are perceived as objects and the objectification of those 
who are subjected. The superimposition of the power relations and 
knowledge relations assumes in the examination all its visible 
brilliance. It is yet another innovation of the classical age that the 
historians of science have left unexplored. People write the history 
of experiments on those born blind, on wolf-children or under 
hypnosis. But who will write the more general, more fluid, but also 
more determinant history of the ‘examination’ - its rituals, its 
methods, its characters and their roles, its play of questions and 
answers, its systems of marking and classification.^ For in this 
slender technique are to be found a whole domain of knowledge, a 
whole type of power. One often speaks of the ideology that the 
human ‘sciences’ bring with them, in either discreet or prolix manner. 
But does their very technology, this tiny operational schema that 
has become so widespread (from psychiatry to pedagogy, from the 
diagnosis of diseases to the hiring of labour), this familiar method 
