his sentence" (Le Peletier, 329-30). And in the simple, military style 
of the imperial ceremonies, Bexon was to imagine some years later a 
whole tableau of penal heraldry: ‘The prisoner condemned to death 
will be taken to the scaffold in a cart “hung or painted in black and 
red”; if he is a traitor, he will wear a red coat on which will be 
inscribed, in front and behind, the word “traitor”; if he is a parri¬ 
cide, his head will be covered with a black veil and on his shirt will 
be embroidered daggers or whatever instruments of death he used; 
if he is a poisoner, his red shirt will be decorated with snakes and 
other venomous animals’ (Bexon, 24-3 - this project was presented 
to the King of Bavaria). 

This legible lesson, this ritual recoding, must be repeated as often 
as possible; the punishments must be a school rather than a festival; 
an ever-open book rather than a ceremony. The duration that makes 
the punishment effective for the guilty is also useful for the specta¬ 
tors. They must be able to consult at each moment the permanent 
lexicon of crime and punishment. A secret punishment is a punish¬ 
ment half wasted. Children should be allowed to come to the places 
where the penalty is being carried out; there they will attend their 
classes in civics. And grown men will periodically relearn the laws. 
Let us conceive of places of punishment as a Garden of the Laws 
that families would visit on Sundays. ‘I propose that, from time to 
rime, after preparing people’s minds with a reasoned discourse on 
the preservation of the social order, on the utility of punishment, 
men as well as boys should be taken to the mines and to the work 
camps and contemplate the frightful fate of these outlaws. Such 


III 



Punishment 


pilgrimages would be more useful than the pilgrimages made by the 
Turks to Mecca’ (Brissot). And Le Peletier considered that this 
visibility of punishment was one of the fundamental principles of the 
new penal code: ‘Often, at certain special times, the presence of 
the people must bring down shame upon the heads of the guilty; and 
the presence of the guilty person in the pitiful state to which his crime 
has reduced him must bring useful instruction to the souls of the 
people’ (Le Peletier, 322). Long before he was regarded as an object 
of science, the criminal was imagined as a source of instruction. 
Once one made charitable visits to prisoners to share in their suffer¬ 
ings (the seventeenth century had invented or revived this practice); 
now it was being suggested that children should come and learn how 
the benefits of the law are applied to crime - a living lesson in the 
museum of order. 

6. This will make possible in society an inversion of the tradi¬ 
tional discourse of crime. How can one extinguish the dubious glory 
of the criminal.^ This was a matter of grave concern to the law¬ 
makers of the eighteenth century. How can one silence the adven¬ 
tures of the great criminals celebrated in the almanacs, broadsheets 
and popular tales.^ If the recoding of punishment is well done, if the 
ceremony of mourning takes place as it should, the crime can no 
longer appear as anything but a misfortune and the criminal as an 
enemy who must be re-educated into social life. Instead of those 
songs of praise that turn the criminal into a hero, only those 
obstacle-signs that arrest the desire to commit the crime by the 
calculated fear of punishment will circulate in men’s discourse. The 
positive mechanics will operate to the full in the language of every 
day, which will constantly reinforce it with new accounts. Discourse 
will become the vehicle of the law: the constant principle of uni¬ 
versal recoding. The poets of the people will at last join those who 
call themselves the ‘missionaries of eternal reason’; they will become 
moralists. ‘Filled with these terrible images and salutary ideas, each 
citizen will spread them through his family and there, by long 
accounts delivered with as much fervour as they are avidly listened 
to, his children gathered around him, will open up their young 
memories to receive, in imperishable lineaments, the notion of 
crime and punishment, the love of law and country, the respect and 
trust of the magistrature. Country people, too, will be witnesses of 


112 



The gentle way in punishment 


these examples and will sow them around their huts, the taste of 
virtue will take root in these coarse souls, while the evil-doer, dis¬ 
mayed at the public joy, fearful at the sight of so many enemies, 
may abandon plans whose outcome will be as prompt as it is 
gloomy’ (Servan, 37). 

This, then, is how one must imagine the punitive city. At the 
crossroads, in the gardens, at the side of roads being repaired or 
bridges built, in workshops open to all, in the depths of mines that 
may be visited, will be hundreds of tiny theatres of punishment. 
Each crime will have its law; each criminal his punishment. It will 
be a visible punishment, a punishment that tells all, that explains, 
justifies itself, convicts: placards, different-coloured caps bearing 
inscriptions, posters, symbols, texts read or printed, tirelessly repeat 
the code. Scenery, perspectives, optical effects, trompe-Votil some¬ 
times magnify the scene, making it more fearful than it is, but also 
