
14 One should study how the practice of biography became widespread at 
about the same time as the constitution of the individual delinquent in 
the punitive mechanisms: the biography or autobiography of prisoners 


319 




Notes 


in Appert; the drawing up of biographical files on the psychiatric 
model; the use of biography in the defence of accused persons. On 
the last point one might compare the great justificatory memoirs of 
the late eighteenth century written for the three men condemned to the 
wheel, or for Jeanne Salmon — and the defences of criminals in the 
period of Louis Philippe. Chaix d’Est-Ange pleaded for La Ronciere: 
‘If long before the crime, long before the charge is laid, you can 
scrutinize the defendant’s life, penetrate into his heart, find its most 

hidden corners, lay bare all his thoughts, his entire soul_ ’ {Discours 

etplaidoyers. III, i 6 < 5 ). 

2 Illegalities and delinquency 

1 Revue de Paris, 7 June 1836. This part of the spectacle, in 1836, was 
no longer public; only a few privileged spectators were admitted to it. 
The account of the riveting of the convicts’ chains to be found in the 
Revue de Paris corresponds exactly - to the point even of using the 
same words - with that of the Dernier jour d’un condamne, 1829. 

2 The Gaiette des trihunaux regularly published these lists and these 
‘criminal’ notices. From the following description people would be 
able to recognize Delacollonge: ‘Old cloth trousers over a pair of 
boots, a peaked cap of the same stuff and a grey overall.. . A coat of 
blue stuff’ (6 June 1836). Later, it was decided to disguise Delacollonge 
in order to protect him from the violence of the crowd. The Gazette 
des trihunaux immediately described the disguise: ‘Striped trousers, 
blue linen overalls, a straw hat’ (20 July). 

3 Revue de Paris, June 1836. Cf. Claude Gueux: ‘Feel all those heads ... 
each of these fallen men has below him his own bestial type. . . Here 
is the lynx, here the cat, here the monkey, here the vulture, here the 
hyena.’ 

4 Revue de Paris, 7 June 1836. According to the Gazette des trihunaux, 
Thorez, who commanded the chain-gang of 19 July, wished to 
remove these ornaments: ‘It is not fitting that, as you go to the convict- 
ship to expiate your crimes, you should push effrontery so far as to 
decorate your hair, as if you were going to your wedding.’ 

5 Revue de Paris, 7 June 1836. On this date, the chain-gang had been 
shortened in order to prevent this merry-go-round and soldiers had 
been commanded to maintain order up to the departure of the chain- 
gang. The convicts’ Sabbath is described in the Dernier jour d’un 
condamne: ‘Society was represented there by the gaolers and the horri¬ 
fied and curious bystanders. The criminal defined the intentions of 
society and made of this horrible punishment a family festival.’ 


320 




Notes 


6 A song of the same kind is quoted by the Gcqette des tribunaux of 
10 April 1836. It was sung to the tune of the ‘Marseillaise’. The 
patriotic war song clearly became the song of the social war: ‘What do 
these stupid people want of us, do they come to insult us in our mis¬ 
fortune.^ They stare at us calmly. Our butchers do not horrify them.’ 

7 There is a class of writers who ‘have striven to glorify the crimes of 
certain exceptionally skilled malefactors, give them the leading roles 
and expose the agents of authority to their sallies, their jeers and their 
ill-disguised mockery. Whoever has seen a performance oiAuberge des 
Adrets or Robert Macaire, a drama celebrated among the people, will 
recognize without difficulty the correctness of my observations. It is 
the triumph, the apotheosis, of audacity and crime. Honest folk and 
the forces of public order are ridiculed from beginning to end’ (Fregier, 
II, 187-8). 

8 Gaiette des tribunaux, 23 July 1837. On 9 August, the Gaiette reported 
that the carriage had overturned on the outskirts of Guingamp: 
instead of mutinying, the prisoners, ‘helped their guardians to put 
their common vehicle back on its wheels’. Yet on 30 October, it noted 
an escape at Valence. 

9 Text addressed to L’Atelier, October 1842, by a worker imprisoned 
for joining a workers’ association. It was able to note this protest at a 
time when the same newspaper was waging a campaign against com¬ 
petition from penal labour. The same issue carried a letter from another 
worker on the same subject. Cf. also La Fraterniti, March 1842, 
1st year, no. 10. 
