through a scientific rationality that introduced into our old prisons 
the refinement of penitentiary techniques. Nor is it true that the 
internal elaboration of penitentiary methods has finally brought to 
light the ‘objective’ existence of a delinquency that the abstraction 
and rigidity of the law were unable to perceive. They appeared 
together, the one extending from the other, as a technological 
ensemble that forms and fragments the object to which it applies its 
instruments. And it is this delinquency, formed in the foundations 
of the judicial apparatus, among the ‘basses oeuvres', the servile tasks, 
from which justice averts its gaze, out of the shame it feels in punish¬ 
ing those it condemns, it is this delinquency that now comes to 
haunt the untroubled courts and the majesty of the laws; it is this 
delinquency that must be known, assessed, measured, diagnosed, 
treated when sentences are passed. It is now this delinquency, this 
anomaly, this deviation, this potential danger, this illness, this form 
of existence, that must be taken into account when the codes are 
rewritten. Delinquency is the vengeance of the prison on justice. 
It is a revenge formidable enough to leave the judge speechless. 
It is at this point that the criminologists raise their voices. 

But we must not forget that the prison, that concentrated and 
austere figure of all the disciplines, is not an endogenous element in 
the penal system as defined at the turn of the eighteenth and nine¬ 
teenth centuries. The theme of a punitive society and of a general 
semio-technique of punishment that has sustained the ‘ideological’ 


255 




Prison 


codes - Beccarian or Benthamite - did not itself give rise to the 
universal use of the prison. This prison came from elsewhere - from 
the mechanisms proper to a disciplinary power. Now, despite this 
heterogeneity, the mechanisms and effects of the prison have spread 
right through modern criminal justice; delinquency and the delin¬ 
quents have become parasites on it through and through. One must 
seek the reason for this formidable ‘efficiency’ of the prison. But pne 
thing may be noted at the outset; the penal justice defined in the 
eighteenth century by the reformers traced two possible but diver¬ 
gent lines of objectification of the criminal; the first was the series 
of ‘monsters’, moral or political, who had fallen outside the social 
pact; the second was that of the juridical subject rehabilitated by 
punishment. Now the ‘delinquent’ makes it possible to join the two 
lines and to constitute under the authority of medicine, psychology 
or criminology, an individual in whom the offender of the law and 
