method: the monastic cell. Even if the compartments it assigns 
become purely ideal, the disciplinary space is always, basically, 
cellular. Solitude was necessary to both body and soul, according to 
a certain asceticism: they must, at certain moments at least, confront 
temptation and perhaps the severity of God alone. ‘Sleep is the 
image of death, the dormitory is the image of the sepulchre — 
although the dormitories are shared, the beds are nevertheless 
arranged in such a way and closed so exactly by means of curtains 
that the girls may rise and retire without being seen’ {Reglementpour 
la communauti des fillet du Bon Pasteur, in Delamare, 507). But this 
is still a very crude form. 

3. The rule oifunctional sites would gradually, in the disciplinary 
institutions, code a space that architecture generally left at the dis¬ 
posal of several different uses. Particular places were defined to 
correspond not only to the need to supervise, to break dangerous 


143 



Discipline 


communications, but also to create a useful space. The process 
appeared clearly in the hospitals, especially in the military and naval 
hospitals. In France, it seems that Rochefort served both as experi¬ 
ment and model. A port, and a military port is - with its circulation 
of goods, men signed up willingly or by force, sailors embarking 
and disembarking, diseases and epidemics - a place of desertion, 
smuggling, contagion: it is a crossroads for dangerous mixtures, a 
meeting-place for forbidden circulations. The naval hospital must 
therefore treat, but in order to do this it must be a filter, a mechanism 
that pins down and partitions; it must provide a hold over this whole 
mobile, swarming mass, by dissipating the confusion of illegality 
and evil. The medical supervision of diseases and contagions is 
inseparable from a whole series of other controls: the military control 
over deserters, fiscal control over commodities, administrative con¬ 
trol over remedies, rations, disappearances, cures, deaths, simula¬ 
tions. Hence the need to distribute and partition off space in a 
rigorous manner. The first steps taken at Rochefort concerned 
things rather than men, precious commodities, rather than patients. 
The arrangements of fiscal and economic supervision preceded the 
techniques of medical observation: placing of medicines under lock 
and key, recording their use; a little later, a system was worked out 
to verify the real number of patients, their identity, the units to 
which they belonged; then one began to regulate their comings and 
goings; they were forced to remain in their wards; to each bed was 
attached the name of its occupant; each individual treated was 
entered in a register that the doctor had to consult during the visit; 
later came the isolation of contagious patients and separate beds. 
Gradually, an administrative and political space was articulated upon 
a therapeutic space; it tended to individualize bodies, diseases, 
symptoms, lives and deaths; it constituted a real table of juxtaposed 
and carefully distinct singularities. Out of discipline, a medically 
useful space was bom. 

In the factories that appeared at the end of the eighteenth century, 
the principle of individualizing partitioning became more compli¬ 
cated. It was a question of distributing individuals in a space in 
which one might isolate them and map them; but also of articulating 
this distribution on a production machinery that had its own re¬ 
quirements. The distribution of bodies, the spatial arrangement of 


144 



Docile bodies 


production machinery and the different forms of activity in the 
distribution of ‘posts’ had to be linked together. The Oberkampf 
manufactory at Jouy obeyed this principle. It was made up of a 
series of workshops specified according to each broad type of opera¬ 
tion: for the printers, the handlers, the colourists, the women who 
touched up the design, the engravers, the dyers. The largest of the 
buildings, built in 1791, by Toussaint Barre, was no metres long 
and had three storeys. The ground floor was devoted mainly to 
block printing; it contained 132 tables arranged in two rows, the 
length of the workshop, which had eighty-eight windows; each 
printer worked at a table with his ‘puller’, who prepared and spread 
the colours. There were 264 persons in all. At the end of each table 
was a sort of rack on which the material that had just been printed 
was left to dry (Saint-Maur). By walking up and down the central 
aisle of the workshop, it was possible to carry out a supervision that 
was both general and individual: to observe the worker’s presence 
and application, and the quality of his work; to compare workers 
with one another, to classify them according to skill and speed; 
to follow the successive stages of the production process. All these 
serializations formed a permanent grid: confusion was eliminated*: 
that is to say, production was divided up and the labour process 
was articulated, on the one hand, according to its stages or element¬ 
ary operations, and, on the other hand, according to the individuals, 
the particular bodies, that carried it out: each variable of this force - 
strength, promptness, skill, constancy - would be observed, and 
therefore characterized, assessed, computed and related to the 
individual who was its particular agent. Thus, spread out in a per¬ 
