
Punishment 


was to recognize in this relation one of the fundamental mechanisms 
of absolute power: the executioner acts as a cog between the prince 
and the people; the death he deals is like that of the serfs who built 
St Petersburg over swamp and pestilence: it is a principle of uni¬ 
versality; of the individual will of the despot, it makes a law for all, 
and of each of those destroyed bodies, a stone for the State; it hardly 
matters that innocents, too, are struck down! In this same dangerous 
and ritual violence, the eighteenth-century reformers denounced, on 
the contrary, that which exceeded, on both sides, the legitimate 
exercise of power: in this violence, according to them, tyranny 
confronts rebellion; each calls forth the other. It is a double danger. 
Instead of taking revenge, criminal justice should simply punish. 

This need for punishment without torture was first formulated 
as a cry from the heart or from an outraged nature. In the worst of 
murderers, there is one thing, at least, to be respected when one 
punishes: his ‘humanity’. The day was to come, in the nineteenth 
century, when this ‘man’, discovered in the criminal, would become 
the target of penal intervention, the object that it claimed to correct 
and transform, the domain of a whole series of ‘criminological’ 
sciences and strange ‘penitentiary’ practices. But, at the time of the 
Enlightenment, it was not as a theme of positive knowledge that 
man was opposed to the barbarity of the public executions, but as a 
legal limit: the legitimate frontier of the power to punish. Not that 
which must be reached in order to alter him, but that which must 
be left intact in order to respect him. Noli me tangere. It marks the 
end of the sovereign’s vengeance. The ‘man’ that the reformers set 
up against the despotism of the scaffold has also become a ‘man- 
measure’: not of things, but of power. 

There is, therefore, a problem here: how was this man-measure 
opposed to the traditional practice of punishment.^ How did he 
become the great moral justification of the reform movement.^ Why 
this universal horror of torture and such lyrical insistence that 
punishment be ‘humane’’' Or, which amounts to the same thing, 
how are the two elements, which are everywhere present in demands 
for a more lenient penal system, ‘measure’ and ‘humanity’, to be 
articulated upon one another, in a single strategy.’ These elements 
are so necessary and yet so uncertain that it is they, as disturbing as 
ever and still associated in the same dubious relation, that one finds 


74 



Generalized punishment 


today whenever the problem of an economy of punishment is posed. 
It is as if the eighteenth century had opened up the crisis of this 
economy and, in order to resolve it, proposed the fundamental law 
that punishment must have ‘humanity’ as its ‘measure’, without any 
definitive meaning being given to this principle, which nevertheless 
is regarded as insuperable. We must, therefore, recount the birth 
and early days of this enigmatic ‘leniency’. 

Homage is paid to the ‘great reformers’ - Beccaria, Servan, 
Dupaty, Lacretelle, Duport, Pastoret, Target, Bergasse, the com¬ 
pilers of the Cahiers, or petitions, and the Constituent Assembly - 
for having imposed this leniency on a legal machinery and on 
‘classical’ theoreticians who, at the end of the eighteenth century, 
were still rejecting it with well-formulated arguments. (Cf., in par¬ 
ticular, Muyart de Vouglans’s polemic against Beccaria - Muyart, 
1766.) 

Yet this reform must be situated in a process that historians have 
recently uncovered through the study of legal archives: the relaxa¬ 
tion of penality in the eighteenth century or, to be more precise, 
the double movement by which, during this period, crimes seemed 
to lose their violence, while punishments, reciprocally, lost some of 
their intensity, but at the cost of greater intervention. From the end 
of the seventeenth century, in fact, one observes a considerable 
diminution in murders and, generally speaking, in physical acts of 
aggression; offences against property seem to take over from crimes 
of violence; theft and swindling, from murder and assault; the 
diffuse, occasional, but frequent delinquency of the poorest classes 
was superseded by a limited, but ‘skilled’ delinquency; the criminals 
of the seventeenth century were ‘harassed men, ill-fed, quick to act, 
quick to anger, seasonal criminals’; those of the eighteenth, ‘crafty, 
cunning, sly, calculating’ criminals on the fringes of society (Chaunu, 
1962, 236 and 1966, 107-8). Lastly, the internal organizations of 
delinquency altered; the great gangs of malefactors (looters working 
in small, armed units, groups of smugglers firing on the agents of the 
tax authorities, disbanded soldiers or deserters who roamed the 
countryside together) tended to break up; tracked down more 
efficiently and forced to work in smaller groups - often no more 
than half-a-dozen men - in order to pass undetected, they contented 


75 



Punishment 

