distributed along a corridor like a series of small cells; at regular 
intervals, an officer’s quarters were situated, so that ‘every ten pupils 
had an officer on each side’; the pupils were confined to their cells 
throughout the night; and Paris had insisted that ‘a window be 
placed on the corridor wall of each room from chest-level to within 
one or two feet of the ceiling. Not only is it pleasant to have such 
windows, but one would venture to say that it is useful, in several 
respects, not to mention the disciplinary reasons that may deter¬ 
mine this arrangement’ (quoted in Laulan, 117-18). In the dining¬ 
rooms was ‘a slightly raised platform for the tables of the inspectors 
of studies, so that they may see all the tables of the pupils of their 
divisions during meals’; latrines had been installed with half-doors, 
so that the supervisor on duty could see the head and legs of the 
pupils, and also with side walls sufficiently high ‘that those inside 
cannot see one another’.* This infinitely scrupulous concern with 
surveillance is expressed in the architecture by innumerable petty 
mechanisms. These mechanisms can only be seen as unimportant 
if one forgets the role of this instrumentation, minor but flawless, 
in the progressive objectification and the ever more subtle partition¬ 
ing of individual behaviour. The disciplinary institutions secreted 
a machinery of control that functioned like a microscope of conduct; 
the fine, analytical divisions that they created formed around men 
an apparatus of observation, recording and training. How was one 
to subdivide the gaze in these observation machines.^ How was one 
to establish a network of communications between themi* How was 
one so to arrange things that a homogeneous, continuous power 
would result from their calculated multiplicity.^ 

The perfect disciplinary apparatus would make it possible for a 
single gaze to see everything constantly. A central point would be 
both the source of light illuminating everything, and a locus of 
convergence for everything that must be known: a perfect eye that 
nothing would escape and a centre towards which all gazes would be 
turned. This is what Ledoux had imagined when he built Arc-et- 
Senans; all the buildings were to be arranged in a circle, opening on 
the inside, at the centre of which a high construction was to house 
the administrative functions of management, the policing functions 
of surveillance, the economic functions of control and checking, the 
religious functions of encouraging obedience and work; from here 


173 




Discipline 


all orders would come, all activities would be recorded, all offences 
perceived and judged; and this would be done immediately with no 
other aid than an exact geometry. Among all the reasons for the 
prestige that was accorded in the second half of the eighteenth 
century, to circular architecture, one must no doubt include the fact 
that it expressed a certain political utopia. 

But, the disciplinary gaze did, in fact, need relays. The pyramid 
was able to fulfil, more efficiently than the circle, two requirements: 
to be complete enough to form an uninterrupted network - con¬ 
sequently the possibility of multiplying its levels, and of distributing 
them over the entire surface to be supervised; and yet to be discreet 
enough not to weigh down with an inert mass on the activity to be 
disciplined, and not to act as a brake or an obstacle to it; to be 
integrated into the disciplinary mechanism as a function that in¬ 
creases its possible effects. It had to be broken down into smaller 
elements, but in order to increase its productive function: specify 
the surveillance and make it functional. 

This was the problem of the great workshops and factories, in 
which a new type of surveillance was organized. It was different 
from the one practised in the regimes of the manufactories, which 
had been carried out from the outside by inspectors, entrusted with 
the task of applying the regulations; what was now needed was an 
intense, continuous supervision; it ran right through the labour 
process; it did not bear - or not only - on production (the nature 
and quantity of raw materials, the type of instruments used, the 
dimensions and quality of the products); it also took into account 
the activity of the men, their skill, the way they set about their tasks, 
their promptness, their zeal, their behaviour. But it was also different 
from the domestic supervision of the master present beside his 
workers and apprentices; for it was carried out by clerks, supervisors 
and foremen. As the machinery of production became larger and 
more complex, as the number of workers and the division of labour 
increased, supervision became ever more necessary and more diffi¬ 
cult. It became a special function, which had nevertheless to form 
an integral part of the production process, to run parallel to it 
throughout its entire length. A specialized personnel became indis¬ 
pensable, constantly present and distinct from the workers: ‘In the 
large factory, everything is regulated by the clock. The workers are 


174 



The means of correct training 


treated strictly and harshly. The clerks, who are used to treating 
them with an air of superiority and command, which is really 
