longer the principal variables that define it; but the place it occupies, 
the interval it covers, the regularity, the good order according to 
which it operates its movements. The soldier is above all a fragment 
of mobile space, before he is courage or honour. Guibert describes 
the soldier in the following way: ‘When he is under arms, he occu¬ 
pies two feet along his greatest diameter, that is to say, taking him 
from one end to the other, and about one foot in his greatest thick¬ 
ness taken from the chest to the shoulders, to which one must add an 
interval of a foot between him and the next man; this gives two feet 
in all directions per soldier and indicates that a troop of infantry in 
battle occupies, either in its front or in its depth, as many steps as it 
has ranks’ (Guibert, 27). This is a functional reduction of the body. 
But it is also an insertion of this body-segment in a whole ensemble 
over which it is articulated. The soldier whose body has been trained 
to function part by part for particular operations must in turn form 
an element in a mechanism at another level. The soldiers will be 
instructed first ‘one by one, then two by two, then in greater 
numbers. . . For the handling of weapons, one will ascertain that, 
when the soldiers have been separately instructed, they will carry it 
out two by two, and then change places alternately, so that the one 
on the left may learn to adapt himself to the one on the right’ 
(‘Ordonnance ...’). The body is constituted as a part of a multi¬ 
segmentary machine. 

2. The various chronological series that discipline must combine 
to form a composite time are also pieces of machinery. The time of 


164 



Docile bodies 


each must be adjusted to the time of the others in such a way that the 
maximum quantity of forces may be extracted from each and com¬ 
bined with the optimum result. Thus Servan dreamt of a military 
machine that would cover the whole territory of the nation and in 
which each individual would be occupied without interruption but 
in a different way according to the evolutive segment, the generic 
sequence in which he finds himself. Military life would begin in 
childhood, when young children would be taught the profession of 
arms in ‘military manors’; it would end in these same manors when 
the veterans, right up to their last day, would teach the children, 
exercise the recruits, preside over the soldiers’ exercises, supervise 
them when they were carrying out works in the public interest, and 
finally make order reign in the country, when the troops were fight¬ 
ing at the frontiers. There is not a single moment of life from which 
one cannot extract forces, providing one knows how to differentiate 
it and combine it with others. Similarly, one uses the labour of 
children and of old people in the great workshops; this is because 
they have certain elementary capacities for which it is not necessary 
to use workers who have many other aptitudes; furthermore, they 
constitute a cheap labour force; lastly, if they work, they are no 
longer at anyone’s charge: ‘Labouring mankind’, said a tax collector 
of an enterprise at Angers, ‘may find in this manufactory, from the 
age of ten to old age, resources against idleness and the penury that 
follows from it’ (Marchegay, 360). But it was probably in primary 
education that this adjustment of different chronologies was to be 
carried out with most subtlety. From the seventeenth century to the 
introduction, at the beginning of the nineteenth, of the Lancaster 
method, the complex clockwork of the mutual improvement school 
was built up cog by cog: first the oldest pupils were entrusted with 
tasks involving simple supervision, then of checking work, then of 
teaching; in the end, all the time of all the pupils was occupied either 
with teaching or with being taught. The school became a machine 
for learning, in which each pupil, each level and each moment, if 
correctly combined, were permanently utilized in the general pro¬ 
cess of teaching. One of the great advocates of the mutual improve¬ 
ment schools gives us some idea of this progress: ‘In a school of 360 
children, the master who would like to instruct each pupil in turn 
for a session of three hours would not be able to give half a minute 


165 




Discipline 


to each. By the new method, each of the 360 pupils writes, reads or 
counts for two and a half hours’ (cf. Bernard). 

3. This carefully measured combination of forces requires a 
precise system of command. All the activity of the disciplined 
individual must be punctuated and sustained by injunctions whose 
efficacity rests on brevity and clarity; the order does not need to be 
explained or formulated; it must trigger off the required behaviour 
and that is enough. From the master of discipline to him who is 
subjected to it the relation is one of signalization: it is a question not 
of understanding the injunction but of perceiving the signal and 
reacting to it immediately, according to a more or less artificial, 
prearranged code. Place the bodies in a little world of signals to each 
of which is attached a single, obligatory response; it is a technique 
of training, of dressage, that ‘despotically excludes in everything 
the least representation, and the smallest murmur’; the dis¬ 
ciplined soldier ‘begins to obey whatever he is ordered to do; his 
