but a woman, who attempted, unsuccessfully, to stick a needle into 
the wicked master, was banished for three years (Anchel, 226). 

One remembers the great legal affairs of the eighteenth century, 
when enlightened opinion intervened in the persons of the philoso- 
phes and certain magistrates: Galas, Sirven and the Chevalier de La 
Barre, for instance. But less attention is given to the popular agita¬ 
tions caused by punitive practice. Indeed, they seldom spread be¬ 
yond a town, or even a district. Yet they did have a real importance. 
Sometimes these movements, which originated from below, spread 
and attracted the attention of more highly placed persons who, 
taking them up, gave them a new dimension (in the years preceding 
the Revolution, the affair of Catherine Espinas, falsely convicted of 
parricide in 1785, or the case of the three men of Chaumont, con¬ 
demned to the wheel, for whom Dupaty, in 1786, wrote his cele¬ 
brated memoir, or that of Marie Fran^oise Salmon, whom the 
parlement of Rouen in 1782 had condemned to the stake, for poison¬ 
ing, but who in 1786 had still not been executed). More usually, 
those disturbances had maintained around penal justice and its 
manifestations, which ought to have been exemplary, a state of 
permanent unrest. How often had it proved necessary, in order to 


62 



The spectacle of the scaffold 

ensure order around the scaffolds, to take steps that were ‘distressing 
to the people’ and ‘humiliating for the authorities’ (Argenson, 241)? 
It was evident that the great spectacle of punishment ran the risk 
of being rejected by the very people to whom it was addressed. In 
fact, the terror of the public execution created centres of illegality: 
on execution days, work stopped, the taverns were full, the authori¬ 
ties were abused, insults or stones were thrown at the executioner, 
the guards and the soldiers; attempts were made to seize the con¬ 
demned man, either to save him or to kill him more surely; fights 
broke out, and there was no better prey for thieves than the curious 
throng around the scaffold. (Hardy recounts a number of cases like 
the important theft that was committed in the very house in which 
the police magistrate was lodging - IV, 56.) But above all - and this 
was why these disadvantages became a political danger - the people 
never felt closer to those who paid the penalty than in those rituals 
intended to show the horror of the crime and the invincibility of 
power; never did the people feel more threatened, like them, by a 
legal violence exercised without moderation or restraint. The solid¬ 
arity of a whole section of the population with those we would call 
petty offenders - vagrants, false beggars, the indigent poor, pick¬ 
pockets, receivers and dealers in stolen goods - was constantly 
expressed: resistance to police searches, the pursuit of informers, 
attacks on the watch or inspectors provide abundant evidence of 
this (cf. Richet, 118-19). ^^id it was the breaking up of this solidar¬ 
ity that was becoming the aim of penal and police repression. Yet 
out of the ceremony of the public execution, out of that uncertain 
festival in which violence was instantaneously reversible, it was this 
solidarity much more than the sovereign power that was likely to 
emerge with redoubled strength. The reformers of the eighteenth 
and nineteenth centuries were not to forget that, in the last resort, 
the executions did not, in fact, frighten the people. One of their 
first cries was to demand their abolition. 

To clarify the political problem posed by the intervention of the 
people in the spectacle of the executions, one need only cite two 
events. The first took place at Avignon at the end of the seventeenth 
century. It contained all the principal elements of the theatre of 
horror: the physical confrontation between the executioner and the 
condemned man, the reversal of the duel, the executioner pursued 


<53 




Torture 


by the people, the condemned man saved by the ensuing riot and 
the violent inversion of the penal machinery. A murderer by the 
name of Pierre du Fort was to be hanged; several times he ‘had 
caught his feet in the steps’ and had not been able to swing freely. 
‘Seeing this, the executioner had pulled his jerkin up over his face 
and struck him below the knees, on the stomach and on the belly. 
When the people saw that the executioner was causing him too 
much pain, and even believing that he was killing him down there 
with a bayonet... moved by compassion for the patient and fury 
at the executioner, they threw stones at the scaffold just as the 
executioner knocked away the two ladders and threw the patient 
down and leaped on to his shoulders and kicked him, while the wife 
of the said executioner pulled at his feet from under the gallows. 
In doing so, they made blood come from his mouth. But the hail 
of stones came thicker - one stone even struck the hanged man on 
the head - which forced the executioner to dash to the ladder, which 
he descended so rapidly that half-way down he fell from it, and 
struck his head on the ground. Then a crowd of people fell upon 
him. He got to his feet, bayonet in hand, threatening to kill anyone 
who came near him; after falling several times, he finally got to his 
feet, only to be beaten by the crowd, rolled in the mud and nearly 
drowned in the stream, then dragged by the excited and enraged 
