
260 




Illegalities and delinquency 


receiving, but which were addressed to him, and the ridicule that 
brought back, under the appearances of another criminal, the priest 
that he was and would have liked to have concealed. His passion 
was laid out before his eyes, by a buffoon murderer to whom he was 
chained. 

In every town it passed through, the chain-gang brought its 
festival with it; it was a saturnalia of punishment, a penalty turned 
into a privilege. And, by a very curious tradition which seems to 
have escaped the ordinary rites of the public execution, it aroused 
in the convict not so much the compulsory marks of repentance as 
the explosion of a mad joy that denied the punishment. To the 
ornaments of the collar and chain, the convicts themselves added 
ribbons, braided straw, flowers or precious stuffs. The chain was the 
round and the dance; it was also a coupling, a forced marriage in 
forbidden love. Wedding, festival and rite in chains: ‘They ran in 
front of the chains, bunches of flowers in their hands, ribbons or 
straw tassels decorated their caps and the most skilful made crested 
helmets. . . Others wore open-work stockings and clogs or a 
fashionable waistcoat, under a workman’s smock.’* And throughout 
the evening that followed the riveting, the chain-gang formed a 
great merry-go-round, which went round and round the courtyard 
of Bicetre: ‘Woe betide the warders if the chain-gang recognized 
them; they were enveloped and drowned in its rings; the prisoners 
remained masters of the field of battle until nightfall.’® The convicts’ 
Sabbath corresponded to the ceremonial of justice through the 
spectacle it invented. It inverted the splendours, the order of power 
and its signs, the forms of pleasure. But something of the political 
Sabbath was not far away. One would have had to be very deaf 
indeed not to hear something of these new accents. The convicts 
sang marching songs, which rapidly became famous and were 
repeated everywhere for a long time after. No doubt an echo was 
to be found in them of the complaints that the broadsheets attributed 
to criminals - an affirmation of the crime, a black heroization, an 
evocation of terrible punishments and of the general hate that 
surrounded them: ‘Renown, let the trumpets blow for us. . . 
Courage, children, let us submit without fear to the terrible fate 
that hangs over our heads. . . Our chains are heavy, but we will 
bear them. For the convicts, no voice rises to say: relieve them of 




Prison 


their suffering.’ Yet there was in those collective songs a totally new 
tonality; the moral code, which most of the old complaints obeyed, 
was reversed. Instead of bringing remorse, torture sharpened pride; 
the justice that brought the sentence was rejected, and the crowd 
that came to witness what it believed to be repentance or humiliation 
was scorned: ‘So far from our homes, we sometimes moan. Our 
stem brows will make our judges blench. . . Avid of misfortune 
you turn your eyes upon us, hoping to find a blighted, humiliated, 
tearful race. But there is pride in our eyes.’ One also finds the 
assertion that the convict’s life with its companionship has pleasures 
that liberty cannot know. ‘With time let us link oiir pleasures. Under 
lock and key feast days will be born. . . Pleasures are turncoats. 
They will flee the executioners; they follow where the song leads.’ 
And, above all, the present order will not last forever; not only will 
the convicts be freed and resume their rights, but their accusers will 
take their place. Between the criminals and their judges, the day of 
the great reverse judgement will come; ‘The contempt of men 
belongs to us convicts. The gold they worship is also ours. One day, 
this gold will pass into our hands. We will buy it with our lives. 
Others will seize these chains that today you make us bear; they will 
become slaves. As we break out of our shackles, the star of liberty 
will shine for us. . . Farewell, for we brave both your chains and 
your laws.’® The pious theatre imagined by the broadsheets, in 
which the convict exhorted the crowd never to imitate him, was 
becoming a threatening scene in which the crowd was asked to 
choose between the barbarity of the executioners, the injustice of the 
judges and the misfortune of convicts who, though defeated today, 
would triumph one day. 

The great spectacle of the chain-gang was linked with the old 
tradition of the public execution; it was also linked with that multiple 
representation of crime that gave rise at the time to newspapers, 
broadsheets, mountebanks and street theatres;’ but it was also linked 
with the confrontations and struggles whose first rumblings it con¬ 
veyed; it gave them a kind of symbolic outlet: though vanquished 
by the law, the army of disorder promised to return; what the 
violence of order had driven away would overthrow that order and 
bring liberty on its return. ‘I was horrified to see so many sparks 
reappear in those ashes’ {Le Dernier jour d’un condamne). The 


262 



