Sometimes questions of precedence and ceremonial were settled by 
the court itself: ‘The officers will ride according to the following 
order: namely, at the head two police sergeants; then the patient; 
after the patient, Bonfort and Le Corre on his left will walk together, 
followed by the clerk of the court and in this manner shall go to the 
market square at which place the judgement shall be carried out’ 
(quoted in Corre, 7). Now, this meticulous ceremonial was not only 
legal, but quite explicitly military. The justice of the king was 
shown to be an armed justice. The sword that punished the guilty 
was also the sword that destroyed enemies. A whole military machine 
surrounded the scaffold: cavalry of the watch, archers, guardsmen, 
soldiers. This was intended, of course, to prevent any escape or 
show of force; it was also to prevent any outburst of sympathy or 
anger on the part of the people, any attempt to save the condemned 
or to have them immediately put to death; but it was also a reminder 
that every crime constituted as it were a rebellion against the law 
and that the criminal was an enemy of the prince. All these reasons - 
whether a matter of precaution in particular circumstances or a 
functional element in the performance of the ritual - made the public 
execution more than an act of justice; it was a manifestation of 
force; or rather, it was justice as the physical, material and awesome 
force of the sovereign deployed there. The ceremony of the public 
torture and execution displayed for all to see the power relation 
that gave his force to the law. 

As a ritual of armed law, in which the prince showed himself, 
indissociably, both as head of justice and head of war, the public 
execution had two aspects: one of victory, the other of struggle. 
It brought to a solemn end a war, the outcome of which was 
decided in advance, between the criminal and the sovereign; it had 
to manifest the disproportion of power of the sovereign over those 
whom he had reduced to impotence. The dissymmetry, the irre¬ 
versible imbalance of forces were an essential element in the public 
execution. A body effaced, reduced to dust and thrown to the winds, 
a body destroyed piece by piece by the infinite power of the sover¬ 
eign constituted not only the ideal, but the real limit of punishment. 
Take the celebrated torture and execution of Massola, which took 


50 




The spectacle of the scaffold 


place at Avignon and which was one of the first to arouse the 
indignation of contemporaries. This was an apparently paradoxical 
ceremony, since it took place almost entirely after death, and since 
justice did little more than deploy its magnificent theatre, the ritual 
praise of its force, on a corpse. The condemned man was blind¬ 
folded and tied to a stake; all around, on the scaffold, were stakes 
with iron hooks. ‘The confessor whispered in the patient’s ear and, 
after he had given him the blessing, the executioner, who had an 
iron bludgeon of the kind used in slaughter houses, delivered a blow 
with all his might on the temple of the wretch, who fell dead: the 
mortis exactor, who had a large knife, then cut his throat, which 
spattered him with blood; it was a horrible sight to see; he severed 
the sinews near the two heels, and then opened up the belly from 
which he drew the heart, liver, spleen and lungs, which he stuck on 
an iron hook, and cut and dissected into pieces, which he then stuck 
on the other hooks as he cut them, as one does with an animal. 
Look who can at such a sight’ (Bruneau, 259). In the explicit 
reference to the butcher’s trade, the infinitesimal destruction of the 
body is linked here with spectacle: each piece is placed on display. 

The execution was accompanied by a whole ceremonial of 
triumph; but it also included, as a dramatic nucleus in its monotonous 
progress, a scene of confrontation: this was the immediate, direct 
action of the executioner on the body of the ‘patient’. It was a coded 
action, of course, since custom and, often quite explicitly, the sen¬ 
tence prescribed its principal episodes. Nevertheless, it did preserve 
something of the battle. The executioner not only implemented the 
law, he also deployed the force; he was the agent of a violence applied, 
in order to master it, to the violence of the crime. Materially, physic¬ 
ally, he was the adversary of this crime: an adversary who could show 
pity or ruthlessness. Damhoud^re complained, with many of his 
contemporaries, that the executioners exercised ‘every cruelty with 
regard to the evil-doing patients, treating them, buffeting and killing 
them as if they had a beast in their hands’ (Damhoud^re, 219). And 
fora long time the habit did not die out.® There was still an element 
of challenge and of jousting in the ceremony of public execution. 
If the executioner triumphed, if he managed to cut off the head with 
a single blow, he ‘showed it to the people, put it down on the ground 
and then waved to the public who greatly applauded his skill by 


51 




Torture 


clapping’. (A scene observed by T. S. Gueulette, at the execution of 
Montigny in 1737 - cf. Anchel, <>2-9.) Conversely, if he failed, if he 
did not succeed in killing the ‘patient’ as required, he was liable to 
punishment. This was the case of Damiens’s executioner who, being 
