operate a whole system of punishments in conformity with the 
internal regulation of the carriage: a diet of bread and water, thumb¬ 
screws, lack of a cushion that would allow one to sleep, chains on 
both arms. ‘Any reading other than that of books of morality is 
forbidden.’ 

If only for its mildness and speed, this machine ‘would have done 
honour to the sensibility of its author’; but its merit lay in the fact 
that it was a veritable penitentiary carriage. By its external effects, 
it had a quite Benthamite perfection: ‘In the rapid passage of this 
mobile prison which, on its dark, silent flanks, bears no other 
inscription than the following words - Transport of Convicts - 
there is something mysterious and gloomy, which Bentham requires 
in the carrying out of criminal sentences and which leaves in the 
minds of onlookers a more salutary and lasting impression than the 
sight of those cynical and joyous travellers’ {Gaiette des tribimaux, 
15 June 1837). It also had internal effects; even in a journey lasting 
only a few days (during which the inmates had not been detached 
for a single moment), it functioned as an apparams of correction. 
One emerged from it astonishingly calm: ‘From a moral point of 
view, this transportation, which lasts no more than seventy-two 
hours, is a terrible torture whose effects on the prisoner seem to be 
lasting.’ The convicts themselves support this view: ‘In the cell 
carriage, when you don’t sleep, you can only think. And when I 
thought, I came to regret what I had done; in the end, you see, I 
would have been afraid to mend my ways and I don’t want to.’® 

The panoptic carriage had only a short history. Yet the way in 
which it replaced the chain-gang and the reasons for this replacement 
recapitulated the whole process by which in eighty years penal 
detention replaced public execution as a calculated technique for 
altering individual behaviour. The cell-carriage was an apparatus of 
reform. What replaced the public execution was not a massive 
enclosure, it was a carefully articulated disciplinary mechanism - at 
least in principle. 

For the prison, in its reality and visible effects, was denounced at 
once as the great failure of penal justice. In a very strange way, the 
history of imprisonment does not obey a chronology in which one 
sees, in orderly succession, the establishment of a penality of deten- 


264 




Illegalities and delinquency 


