to destroy his existence by the variety of his vices, gradually becomes 
by dint of a habit that is at first purely external, but is soon trans¬ 
formed into a second nature, so familiar with work and the pleasures 
that derive from it, that, provided wise instruction has opened up 
his soul to repentance, he may be exposed with more confidence to 
temptations, when he finally recovers his liberty’ (Julius, 417-18). 
Work is defined, with isolation, as an agent of carceral transforma¬ 
tion. This is to be found as early as the code of 1808: ‘Although the 
penalty inflicted by the law has as its aim the reparation of a crime, 
it is also intended to reform the convict, and this double aim will 
be fulfilled if the malefactor is snatched from that fatal idleness 
which, having brought him to prison, meets him again within its 
walls and, seizing hold of him, brings him to the ultimate degree of 
depravity.’® Work is neither an addition nor a corrective to the 
regime of detention; whether it is a question of forced labour, 
reclusion or imprisonment, it is conceived, by the legislator himself, 
as necessarily accompanying it. But the necessity involved is pre¬ 
cisely not the necessity of which the eighteenth-century reformers 
spoke, when they wished to make imprisonment either an example 
for the public or a useful reparation for society. In the carceral 
regime, the link between work and punishment is of another type. 

Several polemics that took place under the Restoration and the 
July Monarchy throw light on the function attributed to penal 
labour. First, there was the debate on the subject of wages. The 
labour of prisoners was remunerated in France. This posed a prob¬ 
lem: if work in prison is remunerated, that work cannot really form 
part of the penalty; and the prisoner may therefore refuse to perform 
it. Moreover, wages reward the skill of the worker and not the 
improvement of the convict: ‘The worst subjects are almost every¬ 
where the most skilful workers; they are the most highly remuner¬ 
ated, consequently the most intemperate and least ready to repent’ 
(Marquet-Wasselot, quoted in Lucas, 324). The debate, which had 
never quite died down, was resumed with great liveliness in the 
early 1840s; it was a period of economic crisis, a period of workers’ 
agitation and a period, too, in which the opposition between the 
worker and the delinquent was beginning to crystallize (cf. below. 


240 




Complete and austere institutions 


285). There were strikes against the prison workshops: when a 
Chaumont glove-maker succeeded in organizing a workshop at 
Clairvaux, the workers protested, declared that their labour was 
dishonoured, occupied the manufactory and forced the employer to 
abandon his project (cf. Aguet, 30-31). There was also a widespread 
press campaign in the workers’ newspapers: on the theme that the 
government encouraged penal labour in order to reduce ‘free’ wages; 
on the theme that the inconveniences of these prison workshops 
were even more evident for women, who were thus deprived of their 
labour, driven to prostitution and therefore to prison, where these 
same women, who could no longer work when they were free, then 
competed with those who were still at work {UAtelier, 3rd year, 
no. 4, December 1842); on the theme that prisoners were given the 
safest jobs - ‘in warm and sheltered conditions thieves execute the 
work of hat-making and cabinet-making’, while the unemployed 
hatter is forced to go ‘to the human slaughter-house to make white- 
lead at two francs a day’ {L’Atelier, 6th year, no. 2, November 1845); 
on the theme that philanthropy is more concerned about the work¬ 
ing conditions of prisoners than those of free workers: ‘We are sure 
that if prisoners worked with mercury, for example, science would 
be a great deal more ready than it is to find ways of protecting the 
workers from the dangers of its fumes: “Those poor convicts.^” 
someone would exclaim, who scarcely has a word for the gilders. 
But what can you expect? One has to have killed or robbed to 
arouse compassion or interest.’ On the theme above all that, if the 
prison was tending to become a workshop, it would not be long 
before beggars and the unemployed were sent there, thus reconsti¬ 
tuting the old hopitaux giniraux of France or the workhouses of 
England. In addition, there were petitions and letters, especially 
after the law of 1844 - one petition, rejected by the Chambre de 
Paris, ‘found inhuman that one should propose to apply murderers 
and thieves to work that is today the lot of a few thousand workers’; 
‘the Chambre preferred Barrabas to us’ {L’Atelier, 4th year, no. 9, 
June 1844 and 5th year, no. 7, April 1845; cf. also, of the same 
period. La Democratie pacifique)-, typographical workers sent a 
letter to the minister when they learnt that a printing-works was to 
be set up in the prison at Melun: ‘You have decided between 
reprobates justly punished by the law and citizens who sacrifice 


241 




Prison 


their days, in abstinence and probity, to the lives of their families and 
to the wealth of their nation’ {L’Atelier, 5th year, no. 6, March 1845). 

The answers given by the government and the administration to 
this whole campaign changed very little. Penal labour cannot be 
