I have translated the word by ‘torture’, ‘public execution’ or ‘scaffold’. 
The author also refers to another form of torture, 'la question', the extrac¬ 
tion of confessions by interrogation and the systematic application of 
pain. Here I have followed the accepted translation, ‘judidal torture’. 

References to other works are usually given not in footnotes but in an 
abbreviated form in the text itself. These references, in brackets, consist 
of the author’s name and a page number; dates of publication are used to 
distinguish more than one work by an author, and roman numerals refer 
to volume numbers. Full references are to be found in the Bibliography. 






PART ONE 

Torture 






I. The body of the condemned 


On 2 March 1757 Damiens the regicide was condemned ‘to make 
the amende honorable before the main door of the Church of Paris’, 
where he was to be ‘taken and conveyed in a cart, wearing nothing 
but a shirt, holding a torch of burning wax weighing two pounds’; 
then, ‘in the said cart, to the Place de Gr^ve, where, on a scaffold 
that will be erected there, the flesh will be tom from his breasts, 
arms, thighs and calves with red-hot pincers, his right hand, holding 
the knife with which he committed the said parricide, burnt with 
sulphur, and, on those places where the flesh will be tom away, 
poured molten lead, boiling oil, burning resin, wax and sulphur 
melted together and then his body drawn and quartered by four 
horses and his limbs and body consumed by fire, reduced to ashes 
and his ashes thrown to the winds’ {Pieces originales ..., 372-4). 

‘Finally, he was quartered,’ recounts the Gaiette d’Amsterdam of 
I April 1757. ‘This last operation was very long, because the horses 
used were not accustomed to drawing; consequently, instead of 
four, six were needed; and when that did not suffice, they were 
forced, in order to cut off the wretch’s thighs, to sever the sinews 
and hack at the joints... 

‘It is said that, though he was always a great swearer, no blas¬ 
phemy escaped his lips; but the excessive pain made him utter 
horrible cries, and he often repeated: “My God, have pity on me! 
Jesus, help me!” The spectators were all edified by the solicitude 
of the parish priest of St Paul’s who despite his great age did not 
spare himself in offering consolation to the patient.’ 

Bouton, an officer of the watch, left us his account: ‘The sulphur 
was lit, but the flame was so poor that only the top skin of the hand 
was burnt, and that only slightly. Then the executioner, his sleeves 
rolled up, took the steel pincers, which had been especially made 


3 




Torture 


for the occasion, and which were about a foot and a half long, and 
pulled first at the calf of the right leg, then at the thigh, and from 
there at the two fleshy parts of the right arm; then at the breasts. 
Though a strong, sturdy fellow, this executioner found it so difficult 
to tear away the pieces of flesh that he set about the same spot two or 
three times, twisting the pincers as he did so, and what he took away 
formed at each part a wound about the size of a six-pound crown 
piece. 

‘After these tearings with the pincers, Damiens, who cried out 
profusely, though without swearing, raised his head and looked at 
himself; the same executioner dipped an iron spoon in the pot con¬ 
taining the boiling potion, which he poured liberally over each 
wound. Then the ropes that were to be harnessed to the horses were 
attached with cords to the patient’s body; the horses were then 
harnessed and placed alongside the arms and legs, one at each 
limb. 

‘Monsieur Le Breton, the clerk of the court, went up to the 
patient several times and asked him if he had anything to say. He 
said he had not; at each torment, he cried out, as the damned in hell 
are supposed to cry out, “Pardon, my God! Pardon, Lord.” 
Despite all this pain, he raised his head from time to time and looked 
at himself boldly. The cords had been tied so tightly by the men 
who pulled the ends that they caused him indescribable pain. 
Monsieur le Breton went up to him again and asked him if he had 
anything to say; he said no. Several confessors went up to him and 
spoke to him at length; he willingly kissed the crucifix that was held 
out to him; he opened his lips and repeated: “Pardon, Lord.” 

