with the priest, they said, down with that hateful man; he should 
have got his deserts. Without the energy and firmness of the muni¬ 
cipal guard, serious disorders could have taken place. At Vaugirard, 


258 



Illegalities and delinquency 


it was the women who were the most angry. They cried: Down with 
the wicked priest! Down with the monster Delacollonge! The 
police inspectors of Montrouge and Vaugirard and several mayors 
and deputy-mayors ran the gauntlet in their attempt to enforce the 
decision of the courts. Shortly before reaching Issy, Fran5ois, 
recognizing M. Allard and the officers of the brigade, threw his 
wooden bowl at them. It was then remembered that the families of 
some of the former comrades of the convict lived at Ivry. From that 
moment the police inspectors spread out along the route and fol¬ 
lowed the convicts’ cart closely. Those of the Paris gang all threw 
their wooden bowls at the heads of the police, some of whom were 
struck. At that moment, the crowd reacted strongly. They started to 
fight amongst themselves’ {Gaiette des tribimaux, 20 July 1836). 
Between Bicetre and Sevres a considerable number of houses were 
looted as the chain-gang passed by (La Phalange, i August 1836). 

In this festival of the departing convicts, there was something of 
the rites of the scapegoat that is struck as it is chased away, some¬ 
thing of the festival of fools, in which the reversal of roles is prac¬ 
tised, something of the old ceremonies of the scaffold, in which the 
truth must burst forth in the full light of day, something, too, of 
those popular spectacles, in which famous characters or traditional 
types were recognized: the play of truth and infamy, the procession 
of notoriety and shame, invective against the guilty who have been 
unmasked and, on the other hand, the joyous avowal of crimes. One 
sought to rediscover the face of the criminals who had had their 
glory; broadsheets recalled the crimes of those one saw pass; news¬ 
paper^ provided their names and recounted their lives; sometimes 
they provided a description of their persons and dress, so that their 
identity might not pass unnoticed: like programmes for spectators.* 
People also came to examine different types of criminals, trying to 
decide, according to facial appearance or dress, the ‘profession’ of 
the convict, whether he was a murderer or thief: it was a game of 
masquerades and marionnettes, which was also, for more educated 
eyes, something of an empirical ethnography of crime. From spec¬ 
tacles on trestles to Gall’s phrenology, according to the milieu to 
which one belonged, one practised the semiologies of crime at one’s 
disposal: ‘Physiognomies are as varied as clothes: here a majestic 
head, a Murillo face; there a vicious face, framed with thick eyebrows. 


259 




Prison 


which convey all the energy of the determined villain... Elsewhere 
the head of a Fagin emerges from the body of an urchin. Here are 
the smooth, feminine features of accomplices; there the glazed, 
debauched faces of teachers.’® The convicts themselves responded 
to this game, displaying their crimes and enacting their misdeeds: 
this was one of the functions of tattooing, a vignette of their deeds 
or their fate: ‘They bear the insignia of their crimes, either a guillo¬ 
tine tattooed on their left arms, or on their chests a dagger plunged 
into a bleeding heart.’ As they passed, they mimed the scenes of their 
crimes, mocking the judges or the police, boasting of as yet un¬ 
discovered deeds of wickedness. Fran5ois, Lacenaire’s former accom¬ 
plice, said that he had invented a method for killing a man without 
making him cry out and without spilling a single drop of blood. 
The great travelling fair of crime had its tumblers and its mummers, 
in which the comic affirmation of truth answered curiosity and invec¬ 
tive. A whole series of scenes, in this summer of 1836, took place 
around Delacollonge: his crime (he had cut his pregnant mistress 
into pieces) was made much more spectacular by the fact that he 
was a priest; this fact had also saved him from the scaffold. It seems 
that he aroused considerable hate among the people. Earlier, in the 
cart that had brought him to Paris in June 1836, he had been insulted 
and had been unable to hold back his tears; however, he had 
expressed a wish not to be conveyed in a closed carriage, believing 
that the humiliation formed part of his punishment. As he left 
Paris, ‘one cannot imagine the virtuous indignation, the moral anger 
and base actions unleashed by the crowd on this man; he was 
covered with earth and mud; stones and insults rained down upon 
him from the furious bystanders. . . It was an explosion of un¬ 
paralleled rage; the women above all, like veritable furies, displayed 
an unbelievable exaltation of hate’ {La Phalange, i August 1836). 
For his protection, his clothes had to be changed. Certain spectators 
were misled by this and thought that Frangois was he. Frangois 
entered into the spirit of the game and accepted the role; but, to the 
comedy of the crime that he did not commit, he added that of the 
priest that he was not; to the account of ‘his’ crime, he added the 
prayers and broad gestures of blessing directed at the jeering crowd. 
A few steps away, the real Delacollonge, ‘who seemed like a martyr’, 
was undergoing the double affront of the insults that he was not 

