the handling of weapons, shooting, and do not pass to another 
activity until the first has been completely mastered: ‘One of the 
principal mistakes is to show a soldier every exercise at once’ 
(‘Reglement de 1743 ...’); in short, break down time into separate 
and adjusted threads. 2. Organize these threads according to an 
analytical plan - successions of elements as simple as possible, 
combining according to increasing complexity. This presupposes 
that instruction should abandon the principle of analogical repeti¬ 
tion. In the sixteenth century, military exercise consisted above all 
in copying all or part of the action, and of generally increasing the 
soldier’s skill or strength;’ in the eighteenth century, the instruction 
of the ‘manual’ followed the principle of the ‘elementary’ and not of 
the ‘exemplary’: simple gestures - the position of the fingers, the 
bend of the leg, the movement of the arms - basic elements for useful 
actions that also provide a general training in strength, skill, 
docility. 3. Finalize these temporal segments, decide on how long 
each will last and conclude it with an examination, which will have 
the triple function of showing whether the subject has reached the 
level required, of guaranteeing that each subject undergoes the same 
apprenticeship and of differentiating the abilities of each individual. 
When the sergeants, corporals, etc. ‘entrusted with the task of 
instructing the others, are of the opinion that a particular soldier is 
ready to pass into the first class, they will present him first to the 
officers of their company, who will carefully examine him; if they 
do not find him sufficiently practised, they will refuse to admit him; 
if, on the other hand, the man presented seems to them to be ready, 
the said officers will themselves propose him to the commanding 
officer of the regiment, who will see him if he thinks it necessary, 
and will have him examined by the senior officers. The slightest 
mistakes will be enough to have him rejected, and no one will be 
able to pass from the second class to the first until he has undergone 
this first examination’ {Instruction par I'exercise de Vinfanterie, 14 
mai 1754). 4. Draw up series of series; lay down for each individual, 
according to his level, his seniority, his rank, the exercises that are 
suited to him; common exercises have a differing role and each 


158 




Docile bodies 


difference involves specific exercises. At the end of each series, 
others begin, branch off and subdivide in turn. Thus each individual 
is caught up in a temporal series which specifically defines his level 
or his rank. It is a disciplinary polyphony of exercises; ‘Soldiers of 
the second class will be exercised every morning by sergeants, 
corporals, anspessades, lance-corporals. . . The lance-corporals will 
be exercised every Sunday by the head of the section ...; the cor¬ 
porals and anspessades will be exercised every Tuesday afternoon 
by the sergeants and their company and these in turn on the after¬ 
noons of every second, twelfth and twenty-second day of each 
month by senior officers’ {Instruction _). 

It is this disciplinary time that was gradually imposed on peda¬ 
gogical practice - specializing the time of training and detaching it 
from the adult time, from the time of mastery; arranging different 
stages, separated from one another by graded examinations; drawing 
up programmes, each of which must take place during a particular 
stage and which involves exercises of increasing difficulty; qualifying 
individuals according to the way in which they progress through 
these series. For the ‘initiatory’ time of traditional training (an over¬ 
all time, supervised by the master alone, authorized by a single 
examination), disciplinary time had substituted its multiple and 
progressive series. A whole analytical pedagogy was being formed, 
meticulous in its detail (it broke down the subject being taught into 
its simplest elements, it hierarchized each stage of development into 
small steps) and also very precocious in its history (it largely antici¬ 
pated the genetic analyses of the ideologues, whose technical model 
it appears to have been). At the beginning of the eighteenth century, 
Demia suggested a division of the process of learning to read into 
seven levels: the first for those who are beginning to learn the letters, 
the second for those who are learning to spell, the third for those 
who are learning to join syllables together to make words, the 
fourth for those who are reading Latin in sentences or from punc¬ 
tuation to punctuation, the fifth for those who are beginning to read 
French, the sixth for the best readers, the seventh for those who can 
read manuscripts. But, where there are a great many pupils, further 
subdivisions would have to be introduced; the first class would 
comprise four streams: one for those who are learning the ‘simple 
letters’; a second for those who are learning the ‘mixed’ letters; a 


159 




Discipline 


third for those who are learning the abbreviated letters (d, e ...); 
a fourth for those who are learning the double letters (^ff, ss, tt, st). 
The second class would be divided into three streams: for those who 
‘count each letter aloud before spelling the syllable, Z?. 0 ., DO'-, for 
those ‘who spell the most difficult syllables, such as bant, brand, 
spinx', etc. (Demia, 19-20). Each stage in the combinatory of el¬ 
