operate the mechanisms of justice itself, even with a view to mitigat¬ 
ing their intensity.^ When, by generalizing its effects and trans¬ 
mitting it to every level, it makes it possible to avoid its full rigour.^ 
Carceral continuity and the fusion of the prison-form make it 
possible to legalize, or in any case to legitimate disciplinary power, 
which thus avoids any element of excess or abuse it may entail. 

But, conversely, the carceral pyramid gives to the power to 
inflict legal punishment a context in which it appears to be free of all 
excess and all violence. In the subtle gradation of the apparatuses of 
discipline and of the successive ‘embeddings’ that they involve, the 
prison does not at all represent the unleashing of a different kind of 
power, but simply an additional degree in the intensity of a mechan¬ 
ism that has continued to operate since the earliest forms of legal 
punishment. Between the latest institution of ‘rehabilitation’, where 
one is taken in order to avoid prison, and the prison where one is 
sent after a definable offence, the difference is (and must be) scarcely 
perceptible. There is a strict economy that has the effect of render¬ 
ing as discreet as possible the singular power to punish. There is 
nothing in it now that recalls the former excess of sovereign power 
when it revenged its authority on the tortured body of those about 
to be executed. Prison continues, on those who are entrusted to it, 
a work begun elsewhere, which the whole of society pursues on 


302 



The carceral 


each individual through innumerable mechanisms of discipline. By 
means of a carceral continuum, the authority that sentences infil¬ 
trates all those other authorities that supervise, transform, correct, 
improve. It might even be said that nothing really distinguishes 
them any more except the singularly ‘dangerous’ character of the 
delinquents, the gravity of their departures from normal behaviour 
and the necessary solemnity of the ritual. But, in its function, the 
power to punish is not essentially different from that of curing or 
educating. It receives from them, and from their lesser, smaller task, 
a sanction from below; but one that is no less important for that, 
since it is the sanction of technique and rationality. The carceral 
‘naturalizes’ the legal power to punish, as it ‘legalizes’ the technical 
power to discipline. In thus homogenizing them, effacing what may 
be violent in one and arbitrary in the other, attenuating the effects of 
revolt that they may both arouse, thus depriving excess in either of 
any purpose, circulating the same calculated, mechanical and dis¬ 
creet methods from one to the other, the carceral makes it possible 
to carry out that great ‘economy’ of power whose formula the 
eighteenth century had sought, when the problem of the accumula¬ 
tion and useful administration of men first emerged. 

By operating at every level of the social body and by mingling 
ceaselessly the art of rectifying and the right to punish, the universal¬ 
ity of the carceral lowers the level from which it becomes natural 
and acceptable to be punished. The question is often posed as to 
how, before and after the Revolution, a new foundation was given 
to the right to punish. And no doubt the answer is to be found in 
the theory of the contract. But it is perhaps more important to ask 
the reverse question: how were people made to accept the power to 
punish, or quite simply, when punished, tolerate being so. The 
theory of the contract can only answer this question by the fiction 
of a juridical subject giving to others the power to exercise over him 
the right that he himself possesses over them. It is highly probable 
that the great carceral continuum, which provides a communication 
between the power of discipline and the power of the law, and 
extends without interruption from the smallest coercions to the 
longest penal detention, constituted the technical and real, immedi¬ 
ately material counterpart of that chimerical granting of the right to 
punish. 



Prison 


4. With this new economy of power, the carceral system, which 
is its basic instrument, permitted the emergence of a new form of 
‘law’; a mixture of legality and nature, prescription and constitution, 
the norm. This had a whole series of effects: the internal dislocation 
of the judicial power or at least of its functioning; an increasing 
difficulty in judging, as if one were ashamed to pass sentence; a 
furious desire on the part of the judges to judge, assess, diagnose, 
recognize the normal and abnormal and claim the honour of curing 
or rehabilitating. In view of this, it is useless to believe in the good 
or bad consciences of judges, or even of their unconscious. Their 
immense ‘appetite for medicine’ which is constantly manifested - 
from their appeal to psychiatric experts, to their attention to the 
chatter of criminology - expresses the major fact that the power 
they exercise has been ‘denatured’; that it is at a certain level governed 
by laws; that at another, more fundamental level it functions as a 
normative power; it is the economy of power that they exercise, 
and not that of their scruples or their humanism, that makes them 
pass ‘therapeutic’ sentences and recommend ‘rehabilitating’ periods 
of imprisonment. But, conversely, if the judges accept ever more 
reluctantly to condemn for the sake of condemning, the activity of 
judging has increased precisely to the extent that the normalizing 
power has spread. Borne along by the omnipresence of the mechan¬ 
isms of discipline, basing itself on all the carceral apparatuses, it has 
