
Hence the major effect of the Panopticon: to induce in the inmate 
a state of conscious and permanent visibility that assures the auto¬ 
matic functioning of power. So to arrange things that the surveil¬ 
lance is permanent in its effects, even if it is discontinuous in its 
action; that the perfection of power should tend to render its actual 
exercise unnecessary; that this architectural apparatus should be a 
machine for creating and sustaining a power relation independent 
of the person who exercises it; in short, that the inmates should be 
caught up in a power situation of which they are themselves the 
bearers. To achieve this, it is at once too much and too little that the 
prisoner should be constantly observed by an inspector: too little, 
for what matters is that he knows himself to be observed; too much, 
because he has no need in fact of being so. In view of this, Bentham 
laid down the principle that power should be visible and unveri- 
fiable. Visible: the inmate will constantly have before his eyes the 
tall outline of the central tower from which he is spied upon. 
Unverifiable: the inmate must never know whether he is being 
looked at at any one moment; but he must be sure that he may always 
be so. In order to make the presence or absence of the inspector 
unverifiable, so that the prisoners, in their cells, cannot even see a 
shadow, Bentham envisaged not only Venetian blinds on the 
windows of the central observation hall, but, on the inside, partitions 
that intersected the hall at right angles and, in order to pass from 
one quarter to the other, not doors but zig-zag openings; for the 
slightest noise, a gleam of light, a brightness in a half-opened door 
would betray the presence of the guardian.^ The Panopticon is a 


201 




Discipline 


machine for dissociating the see/being seen dyad: in the periph¬ 
eric ring, one is totally seen, without ever seeing; in the central 
tower, one sees everything without ever being seen.® 

It is an important mechanism, for it automatizes and disindivi- 
dualizes power. Power has its principle not so much in a person as 
in a certain concerted distribution of bodies, surfaces, lights, gazes; 
in an arrangement whose internal mechanisms produce the relation 
in which individuals are caught up. The ceremonies, the rituals, the 
marks by which the sovereign’s surplus power was manifested are 
useless. There is a machinery that assures dissymmetry, disequili¬ 
brium, difference. Consequently, it does not matter who exercises 
power. Any individual, taken almost at random, can operate the 
