tus as a whole that produces ‘power’ and distributes individuals in 
this permanent and continuous field. This enables the disciplinary 
power to be both absolutely indiscreet, since it is everywhere and 
always alert, since by its very principle it leaves no zone of shade and 
constantly supervises the very individuals who are entrusted with 
the task of supervising; and absolutely ‘discreet’, for it functions 
permanently and largely in silence. Discipline makes possible the 
operation of a relational power that sustains itself by its own 
mechanism and which, for the spectacle of public events, substitutes 
the uninterrupted play of calculated gazes. Thanks to the techniques 
of surveillance, the ‘physics’ of power, the hold over the body, 
operate according to the laws of optics and mechanics, according 
to a whole play of spaces, lines, screens, beams, degrees and without 
recourse, in principle at least, to excess, force or violence. It is a 
power that seems all the less ‘corporal’ in that it is more subtly 
‘physical’. 


Normalising judgement 

I. At the orphanage of the Chevalier Paulet, the sessions of the 
tribunal that met each morning gave rise to a whole ceremonial: 
‘We found all the pupils drawn up as if for battle, in perfect align¬ 
ment, immobility and silence. The major, a young gentleman of 
sixteen years, stood outside the ranks, sword in hand; at his com¬ 
mand, the troop broke ranks at the double and formed a circle. The 
council met in the centre; each officer made a report of his troop 
for the preceding twenty-four hours. The accused were allowed to 
defend themselves; witnesses were heard; the council deliberated 
and, when agreement was reached, the major announced the number 
of guilty, the nature of the offences and the punishments ordered. 
The troop then marched off in the greatest order’ (Pictet). At the 
heart of all disciplinary systems functions a small penal mechanism. 


177 




Discipline 


It enjoys a kind of judicial privilege with its own laws, its specific 
offences, its particular forms of judgement. The disciplines estab¬ 
lished an ‘infra-penality’; they partitioned an area that the laws had 
left empty; they defined and repressed a mass of behaviour that the 
relative indifference of the great systems of punishment had allowed 
to escape. ‘On entering, the companions will greet one another ... 
on leaving, they must lock up the materials and tools that they have 
been using and also make sure that their lamps are extinguished’; 
‘it is expressly forbidden to amuse companions by gestures or in any 
other way’; they must ‘comport themselves honestly and decently’; 
anyone who is absent for more than five minutes without warning 
M. Oppenheim will be ‘marked down for a half-day’; and in order 
to be sure that nothing is forgotten in this meticulous criminal 
justice, it is forbidden to do ‘anything that may harm M. Oppenheim 
and his companions’ (Oppenheim, 29 September 1809). The work¬ 
shop, the school, the army were subject to a whole micro-penality 
of time (latenesses, absences, interruptions of tasks), of activity 
(inattention, negligence, lack of zeal), of behaviour (impoliteness, 
disobedience), of speech (idle chatter, insolence), of the body 
(‘incorrect’ attitudes, irregular gestures, lack of cleanliness), of 
sexuality (impurity, indecency). At the same time, by way of punish¬ 
ment, a whole series of subtle procedures was used, from light 
physical punishment to minor deprivations and petty humiliations. 
It was a question both of making the slightest departures from cor¬ 
rect behaviour subject to punishment, and of giving a punitive 
function to the apparently indifferent elements of the disciplinary 
apparatus: so that, if necessary, everything might serve to punish 
the slightest thing; each subject find himself caught in a punishable, 
punishing universality. 'By the word punishment, one must under¬ 
stand everything that is capable of making children feel the offence 
they have committed, everything that is capable of humiliating them, 
of confusing them: ... a certain coldness, a certain indifference, a 
question, a humiliation, a removal from office’ (La Salle, Conduite 
■ ■ ; 204-5). 

2. But discipline brought with it a specific way of punishing that 
was not only a small-scale model of the court. What is specific to 
the disciplinary penality is non-observance, that which does not 
measure up to the rule, that departs from it. The whole indefinite 


178 




The means of correct training 


domain of the non-conforming is punishable: the soldier commits 
an ‘offence’ whenever he does not reach the level required; a pupil’s 
‘offence’ is not only a minor infraction, but also an inability to carry 
out his tasks. The regulations for the Prussian infantry ordered that 
a soldier who had not correctly learnt to handle his rifle should be 
treated with the ‘greatest severity’. Similarly, ‘when a pupil has not 
retained the catechism from the previous day, he must be forced to 
learn it, without making any mistake, and repeat it the following 
