
Let us take the ideal figure of the soldier as it was still seen in the 
early seventeenth century. To begin with, the soldier was someone 
who could be recognized from afar; he bore certain signs: the natural 
signs of his strength and his courage, the marks, too, of his pride; 
his body was the blazon of his strength and valour; and although it 
is true that he had to learn the profession of arms little by little - 
generally in actual fighting - movements like marching and attitudes 
like the bearing of the head belonged for the most part to a bodily 
rhetoric of honour; ‘The signs for recognizing those most suited to 
this profession are a lively, alert manner, an erect head, a taut 
stomach, broad shoulders, long arms, strong fingers, a small belly, 
thick thighs, slender legs and dry feet, because a man of such a 
figure could not fail to be agile and strong’; when he becomes a pike- 
bearer, the soldier ‘will have to march in step in order to have as 
much grace and gravity as possible, for the pike is an honourable 
weapon, worthy to be borne with gravity and boldness’ (Mont- 
gommery, 6 and 7). By the late eighteenth century, the soldier has 
become something that can be made; out of a formless clay, an inapt 
body, the machine required can be constructed; posture is gradually 
corrected; a calculated constraint runs slowly through each part of 
the body, mastering it, making it pliable, ready at all times, turning 
silently into the automatism of habit; in short, one has ‘got rid of 
the peasant’ and given him ‘the air of a soldier’ (ordinance of 20 
March 1764). Recruits become accustomed to ‘holding their heads 
high and erect; to standing upright, without bending the back, to 
sticking out the belly, throwing out the chest and throwing back the 
shoulders; and, to help them acquire the habit, they are given this 
position while standing against a wall in such a way that the heels, 
the thighs, the waist and the shoulders touch it, as also do the backs 


135 



Discipline 


of the hands, as one turns the arms outwards, without moving them 
away from the body. . . Likewise, they will be taught never to fix 
their eyes on the ground, but to look straight at those they pass ... 
to remain motionless until the order is given, without moving the 
head, the hands or the feet... lastly to march with a bold step, with 
knee and ham taut, on the points of the feet, which should face 
outwards’ (ordinance of 20 March 1764). 

The classical age discovered the body as object and target of 
power. It is easy enough to find signs of the attention then paid to 
the body - to the body that is manipulated, shaped, trained, which 
obeys, responds, becomes skilful and increases its forces. The great 
book of Man-the-Machine was written simultaneously on two 
registers: the anatomico-metaphysical register, of which Descartes 
wrote the first pages and which the physicians and philosophers 
continued, and the technico-political register, which was constituted 
by a whole set of regulations and by empirical and calculated 
methods relating to the army, the school and the hospital, for con¬ 
trolling or correcting the operations of the body. These two regis¬ 
ters are quite distinct, since it was a question, on the one hand, of 
submission and use and, on the other, of functioning and explana¬ 
tion: there was a useful body and an intelligible body. And yet there 
are points of overlap from one to the other. La Mettrie’s L'Homme- 
machine is both a materialist reduction of the soul and a general 
theory of dressage, at the centre of which reigns the notion of 
‘docility’, which joins the analysable body to the manipulable body. 
A body is docile that may be subjected, used, transformed and 
improved. The celebrated automata, on the other hand, were not 
only a way of illustrating an organism, they were also political 
puppets, small-scale models of power: Frederick II, the meticulous 
king of small machines, well-trained regiments and long exercises, 
was obsessed with them. 

What was so new in these projects of docility that interested the 
eighteenth century so much.^ It was certainly not the first time that 
the body had become the object of such imperious and pressing 
investments; in every society, the body was in the grip of very 
strict powers, which imposed on it constraints, prohibitions or 
obligations. However, there were several new things in these tech¬ 
niques. To begin with, there was the scale of the control: it was a 


136 



Docile bodies 


question not of treating the body, en masse, ‘wholesale’, as if it were 
an indissociable unity, but of working it ‘retail’, individually; of 
exercising upon it a subtle coercion, of obtaining holds upon it at the 
level of the mechanism itself - movements, gestures, attitudes, 
rapidity: an infinitesimal power over the active body. Then there 
was the object of the control: it was not or was no longer the signify¬ 
ing elements of behaviour or the language of the body, but the 
economy, the efficiency of movements, their internal organization; 
constraint bears upon the forces rather than upon the signs; the only 
truly important ceremony is that of exercise. Lastly, there is the 
modality: it implies an uninterrupted, constant coercion, super¬ 
vising the processes of the activity rather than its result and it is 
