disorder of ideas and morals, produced by the contact of so many 
men, women and children’ (Faucher 20). 

3. But prison goes beyond the mere privation of liberty in a 
more important way. It becomes increasingly an instrument for the 
modulation of the penalty; an apparatus which, through the execu¬ 
tion of the sentence with which it is entrusted, seems to have the 
right, in part at least, to assume its principle. Of course, the prison 
institution was not given this ‘right’ in the nineteenth century or 
even in the twentieth, except in a fragmentary form (through the 
oblique way of release on licence, semi-release, the organization of 
reformatories). But it should be noted that it was claimed very 
early on by those responsible for prison administration, as the very 
condition of the good functioning of a prison, and of its efficiency 
in the task of reformation that the law itself had given it. 

The same goes for the duration of the punishment; it makes it 
possible to quantify the penalties exactly, to graduate them accord¬ 
ing to circumstances and to give to legal punishment the more or less 
explicit form of wages; but it also runs the risk of having no correc¬ 
tive value, if it is fixed once and for all in the sentence, The length 
of the penalty must not be a measurement of the ‘exchange value’ 
of the offence; it must be adjusted to the ‘useful’ transformation of 
the inmate during his term of imprisonment. It is not a time- 
measure, but a time finalized. The form of the operation, rather 
than the form of the wages. ‘Just as the prudent physician ends his 
medication or continues it according to whether the patient has 
or has not arrived at a perfect cure, so, in the first of these two 
hypotheses, expiation ought to end with the complete reform of the 
prisoner; for, in this case, all detention has become useless, and from 
then on as inhuman to the reformed individual as it is vainly burden¬ 
some for the State.’*® The correct duration of the penalty must be 
calculated, therefore, not only according to the particular crime and 


244 



Complete and austere institutions 


its circumstances, but also according to the penalty itself as it takes 
place in actual fact. This amounts to saying that, although the 
penalty must be individualized, it is so not on the basis of the 
individual-offender, the juridical subject of his act, the responsible 
author of the offence, but on the basis of the individual punished, 
the object of a supervised transformation, the individual in detention 
inserted in the prison apparatus, modified by it or reacting to it. ‘It 
is a question only of reforming the evil-doer. Once this reform has 
come about, the criminal must return to society’ (C. Lucas, quoted 
in the Gazette des tribunaux, 6 April 1837). 

The quality and content of detention should no longer be deter¬ 
mined by the nature of the offence alone. The juridical gravity of a 
crime does not at all have the value of a univocal sign for the 
character of the convict, whether or not he is capable of reform. In 
particular the crime-offence distinction, which the penal code 
recognized in drawing the corresponding distinction between mere 
imprisonment and imprisonment with hard labour, is not opera¬ 
tional in terms of reform. This was the almost universal opinion 
expressed by the directors of the maisons centrales, during an inquiry 
carried out by the ministry in 1836: ‘The minor offenders are gener¬ 
ally the most vicious. . . Among the criminals, one meets many 
men who have given in to the violence of their passions and to the 
needs of a large family.’ ‘The behaviour of criminals is much better 
than that of the minor offenders; the former are more submissive, 
harder-working than the latter, who, in general, are pickpockets, 
debauchees and idlers.’*' Hence the idea that punitive rigour must 
not be in direct proportion to the penal importance of the offence - 
nor determined once and for all. 

As an operation of correction, imprisonment has its own require¬ 
ments and dangers. It is its effects that must determine its stages, its 
temporary increases, its successive reductions, in severity; what 
Charles Lucas called the ‘mobile classification of moralities’. The 
progressive system applied at Geneva since 1825 was often advo¬ 
cated in France (Fresnel, 29-31). It took the form, for example, of 
three areas; a trial area for prisoners in general, a punishment area 
and a reward area for those who had embarked on the way of reform 
(Lucas, II, 440). Or it took the form of four phases: a period of 
intimidation (deprivation of work and of any internal or external 


245 




Prison 


relations); a period of work (isolation, but work which, after the 
phase of forced idleness, would be welcomed as a benefit); a regime 
of moralization (more or less frequent ‘lectures’ from the directors 
and official visitors); a period of work in common (Duras). Although 
the principle of the penalty was certainly a legal decision, its 
administration, its quality and its rigours must belong to an autono¬ 
mous mechanism that supervises the effects of punishment within the 
very apparatus that produces them. A whole regime of punishments 
