dangerous proclivities of the first, the harmful predispositions of the 
second and the bad antecedents of the third. This biographical 
investigation is an essential part of the preliminary investigation for 
the classification of penalities before it becomes a condition for the 
classification of moralities in the penitentiary system. It must 
accompany the convict from the court to the prison, where the 
governor’s task is not only to receive it, but also to complete, super¬ 
vise and rectify its various factors during the period of detention’ 
(Lucas, II, 440-42). Behind the offender, to whom the investigation 
of the facts may attribute responsibility for an offence, stands the 
delinquent whose slow formation is shown in a biographical 
investigation. The introduction of the ‘biographical’ is important 
in the history of penality. Because it establishes the ‘criminal’ as 
existing before the crime and even outside it. And, for this reason, 
a psychological causality, duplicating the juridical attribution of 
responsibility, confuses its effects. At this point one enters the 
‘criminological’ labyrinth from which we have certainly not yet 
emerged: any determining cause, because it reduces responsibility, 
marks the author of the offence with a criminality all the more for¬ 
midable and demands penitentiary measures that are all the more 
strict. As the biography of the criminal duplicates in penal practice 
the analysis of circumstances used in gauging the crime, so one sees 
penal discourse and psychiatric discourse crossing each other’s 
frontiers; and there, at their point of junction, is formed the notion 
of the ‘dangerous’ individual, which makes it possible to draw up a 
network of causality in terms of an entire biography and to present 
a verdict of punishment-correction.** 

The delinquent is also to be distinguished from the offender in 


252 




Complete and austere institutions 


that he is not only the author of his acts (the author responsible in 
terms of certain criteria of free, conscious will), but is linked to his 
offence by a whole bundle of complex threads (instincts, drives, 
tendencies, character). The penitentiary technique bears not on the 
relation between author and crime, but on the criminal’s affinity with 
his crime. The delinquent, the strange manifestation of an overall 
phenomenon of criminality, is to be found in quasi-natural classes, 
each endowed with its own characteristics and requiring a specific 
treatment, what Marquet-Wasselot called in 1841 the ‘ethnography 
of the prisons’; ‘The convicts are ... another people within the 
same people; with its own habits, instincts, morals’ (Marquet- 
Wasselot, 9). We are still very close here to the ‘picturesque’ 
descriptions of the world of the malefactors - an old tradition that 
goes back a long way and gained new vigour in the early nineteenth 
century, at a time when the perception of another form of life was 
being articulated upon that of another class and another human 
species. A zoology of social sub-species and an ethnology of the 
civilizations of malefactors, with their own rites and language, was 
beginning to emerge in a parody form. But an attempt was also 
being made to constitute a new objectivity in which the criminal 
belongs to a typology that is both natural and deviant. Delinquency, 
a pathological gap in the human species, may be analysed as morbid 
syndromes or as great teratological forms. With Ferrus’s classifica¬ 
tion, we probably have one of the first conversions of the old 
‘ethnography’ of crime into a systematic typology of delinquents. 
The analysis is slender, certainly, but it reveals quite clearly the 
principle that delinquency must be specified in terms not so much 
of the law as of the norm. There are three types of convict; there are 
those who are endowed ‘with intellectual resources above the average 
of intelligence that we have established’, but who have been perverted 
either by the ‘tendencies of their organization’ and a ‘native pre¬ 
disposition’, or by ‘pernicious logic’, an ‘iniquitous morality’, a 
‘dangerous attitude to social duties’. Those that belong to this cat¬ 
egory require isolation day and night, solitary exercise, and, when one 
is forced to bring them into contact with the others, they should 
wear ‘a light mask made of metal netting, of the kind used for stone¬ 
cutting or fencing’. The second category is made up of ‘vicious, stupid 
or passive convicts, who have been led into evil by indifference to 


253 




Prison 


either shame or honour, through cowardice, that is to say, laziness, 
and because of a lack of resistance to bad incitements’; the regime 
suitable to them is not so much that of punishment as of education, and 
if possible of mutual education: isolation at night, work in common 
during the day, conversations permitted provided they are conducted 
aloud, reading in common, followed by mutual questioning, for which 
rewards may be given. Lastly, there are the ‘inept or incapable 
convicts’, who are ‘rendered incapable, by an incomplete organiza¬ 
tion, of any occupation requiring considered effort and consistent 
will, and who are therefore incapable of competing in work with 
intelligent workers and who, having neither enough education to 
know their social duties, nor enough intelligence to understand this 
fact or to struggle against their personal instincts, are led to evil by 
