be other than unique, in any case the last of its kind: no one could 
ever imitate it; no one could take it as an example, or even feel 
scandalized that it should have been committed. It is doomed to 
disappear without trace. This fable’ of the ‘ultimate crime’ is, to the 
new penality, what original sin was to the old: the pure form in 
which the reason for punishment appears. 

Ought such a crime to be punished.^ According to what calcula¬ 
tion.^ Of what use could its punishment be in the economy of the 
power to punish.^ It would be useful to the extent that it could make 
reparation for ‘the harm done to society’ (Pastoret, II, 21). Now, 
if one sets aside the strictly material damage - which even when it is 
irreparable as in the case of a murder is of little account in relation 
to society as a whole - the injury that a crime inflicts upon the 
social body is the disorder that it introduces into it: the scandal that 
it gives rise to, the example that it gives, the incitement to repeat it 
if it is not punished, the possibility of becoming widespread that it 
bears within it. In order to be useful, punishment must have as its 
objective the consequences of the crime, that is to say, the series of 
disorders that it is capable of initiating: ‘The proportion between 
the penalty and the quality of the offence is determined by the 
influence that the violation of the pact has on the social order’ 


92 




Generalized punishment 


(Filangieri, 214). But this influence of a crime is not necessarily in 
direct proportion to its horror; a crime that horrifies the conscience 
is often of less effect than an offence that everyone tolerates and feels 
quite ready to imitate. There is a scarcity of great crimes; on the 
other hand, there is the danger that everyday offences may multiply. 
So one must not seek a qualitative relation between the crime and 
its punishment, an equivalence of horror: ‘Can the cries of a wretch 
in torment bring back from the depths of a past that cannot return 
an action that has already been committed.^’ (Beccaria, 87). One 
must calculate a penalty in terms not of the crime, but of its possible 
repetition. One must take into account not the past offence, but the 
future disorder. Things must be so arranged that the malefactor can 
have neither any desire to repeat his offence, nor any possibility of 
having imitators.® Punishment, then, will be an art of effects; rather 
than opposing the enormity of the penalty to the enormity of the 
crime, one must adjust to one another the two series that follow 
from the crime: its own effects and those of the penalty. A crime 
without a dynasty does not call for punishment; any more than, 
according to another version of the same fable, a society on the 
verge of dissolution and disappearance would have the right to erect 
scaffolds. The last crime cannot but remain unpunished. 

TTiis was an old view. The function of punishment as example 
was to be found long before the eighteenth-century reform. That 
punishment looks towards the future, and that at least one of its 
major functions is to prevent crime had, for centuries, been one of 
the current justifications of the right to punish. But the difference 
was that the prevention that was expected as an effect of the punish¬ 
ment and its spectacle - and therefore of its excess - tended now to 
become the principle of its economy and the measure of its just 
proportions. One must punish exactly enough to prevent repetition. 
There is, then, a shift in the mechanics of example: in a penality 
employing public torture and execution, example was the answer 
to the crime; it had, by a sort of twin manifestation, to show the 
crime and at the same time to show the sovereign power that 
mastered it; in a penality calculated according to its own effects, 
example must refer back to the crime, but in the most discreet way 
possible and with the greatest possible economy indicate the inter¬ 
vention of pbwer; ideally, too, it should prevent any subsequent 


93 




Punishment 


reappearance of either. The example is no longer a ritual that mani¬ 
fests; it is a sign that serves as an obstacle. Through this technique of 
punitive signs, which tends to reverse the whole temporal field of 
penal action, the reformers thought they were giving to the power 
to punish an economic, effective instrument that could be made 
general throughout the entire social body, capable of coding all its 
behaviour and consequently of reducing the whole diffuse domain 
of illegalities. The semio-technique with which one tried to arm the 
power to punish rested on five or six major rules. 

The rule of minimum quantity. A crime is committed because it 
procures certain advantages. If one linked, to the idea of crime, the 
idea of a slightly greater disadvantage, it would cease to be desir¬ 
able. ‘For punishment to produce the effect that must be expected of 
it, it is enough that the harm that it causes exceed the good that the 
criminal has derived from the crime’ (Beccaria, 89). A proximity 
between penalty and crime can, indeed must, be accepted; but no 
longer in its old form, where the public execution had to be equi¬ 
valent in intensity to the crime, with an additional factor that 
