has given an instrumental role in relation to the other illegalities. 
In short, although the juridical opposition is between legality and 
illegal practice, the strategic opposition is between illegalities and 
delinquency. 

For the observation that prison fails to eliminate crime, one should 
perhaps substitute the hypothesis that prison has succeeded ex¬ 
tremely well in producing delinquency, a specific type, a politically 
or economically less dangerous — and, on occasion, usable - form 
of illegality; in producing delinquents, in an apparently marginal, 
but in fact centrally supervised milieu; in producing the delinquent 
as a pathologized subject. The success of the prison, in the struggles 
around the law and illegalities, has been to specify a ‘delinquency’. 
We have seen how the carceral system substituted the ‘delinquent’ 
for the offender, and also superimposed upon juridical practice a 
whole horizon of possible knowledge. Now this process that con¬ 
stitutes delinquency as an object of knowledge is one with the 
political operation that dissociates illegalities and isolates delin¬ 
quency from them. The prison is the hinge of these two mechanisms; 
it enables them to reinforce one another perpetually, to objectify the 
delinquency behind the offence, to solidify delinquency in the move¬ 
ment of illegalities. So successful has the prison been that, after a 
century and a h^lf of ‘failures’, the prison still exists, producing the 
same results, and there is the greatest reluctance to dispense 
with it. 


277 




Prison 


The penality of detention seems to fabricate - hence no doubt its 
longevity - an enclosed, separated and useful illegality. The circuit 
of delinquency would seem to be not the sub-product of a prison 
which, while punishing, does not succeed in correcting; it is rather 
the direct effect of a penality which, in order to control illegal 
practices, seems to invest certain of them in a mechanism of ‘punish¬ 
ment-reproduction’, of which imprisonment is one of the main 
parts. But why and how is the prison called upon to participate in 
the fabrication of a delinquency that it is supposed to combat.^ 

The establishment of a delinquency that constitutes something 
like an enclosed illegality has in fact a number of advantages. To 
begin with, it is possible to supervise it (by locating individuals, 
infiltrating the group, organizing mutual informing): for the vague, 
swarming mass of a population practising occasional illegality, which 
is always likely to spread, or again for those loose bands of vaga¬ 
bonds, recruiting as they move from place to place, and according 
to circumstances, from the unemployed, beggars, ‘bad characters’ 
of all kinds, which sometimes reach such proportions - as we saw at 
the end of the eighteenth century - as to form formidable forces for 
looting and rioting, is substituted a relatively small and enclosed 
group of individuals on whom a constant surveillance may be kept. 
Moreover, it is possible to divert this self-absorbed delinquency to 
forms of illegality that are less dangerous: maintained by the pres¬ 
sure of controls on the fringes of society, reduced to precarious 
conditions of existence, lacking links with the population that would 
be able to sustain it (as was once the case with smugglers or certain 
forms of bandits - cf. Hobsbawm), delinquents inevitably fell back 
on a localized criminality, limited in its power to attract popular 
support, politically harmless and economically negligible. Now this 
concentrated, supervised and disarmed illegality is directly useful. 
It may be useful in relation to other illegalities: isolated from them, 
turned inwards upon its own internal organization, dedicated to a 
violent criminality, of which the poorer classes are often the first 
victims, hemmed in on every side by the police, exposed to long 
prison sentences, followed by a permanently ‘specialized’ life - 
delinquency - this alien, dangerous and often hostile world obstructs 
or at least maintains at a sufficiently low level everyday illegal 
practices (petty thefts, minor acts of violence, routine acts of law- 


278 




Illegalities and delinquency 


breaking); it prevents them from leading to broader, more obvious 
forms, rather as though the exemplary effect once expected of the 
spectacle of the scaffold was now sought not so much in the rigour 
of the punishments, as in the visible, branded existence of delin¬ 
quency itself: while differentiating itself from other popular illegali¬ 
ties, delinquency serves to keep them in check. 

But delinquency has other direct uses. The example of coloniza¬ 
tion comes to mind. Yet it is not the most convincing example; 
indeed, although the deportation of criminals was demanded on 
several occasions under the Restoration, either by the Chamber of 
Deputies or by the General Councils, this was essentially in order 
to lighten the financial burdens imposed by the whole apparatus of 
detention; and, despite all the projects that were drawn up under the 
July monarchy for delinquents, undisciplined soldiers, prostitutes 
and orphans to take part in the colonization of Algeria, that colony 
