


Discipline 


It is perhaps true to say that, in Greece, mathematics were bom 
from techniques of measurement; the sciences of nature, in any case, 
were born, to some extent, at the end of the Middle Ages, from the 
practices of investigation. The great empirical knowledge that 
covered the things of the world and transcribed them into the 
ordering of an indefinite discourse that observes, describes and 
establishes the ‘facts’ (at a time when the western world was begin¬ 
ning the economic and political conquest of this same world) had 
its operating model no doubt in the Inquisition - that immense 
invention that our recent mildness has placed in the dark recesses 
of our memory. But what this politico-juridical, administrative and 
criminal, religious and lay, investigation was to the sciences of 
nature, disciplinary analysis has been to the sciences of man. These 
sciences, which have so delighted our ‘humanity’ for over a century, 
have their technical matrix in the petty, malicious minutiae of the 
disciplines and their investigations. These investigations are perhaps 
to psychology, psychiatry, pedagogy, criminology, and so many 
other strange sciences, what the terrible power of investigation was 
to the calm knowledge of the animals, the plants or the earth. 
Another power, another knowledge. On the threshold of the classi¬ 
cal age. Bacon, lawyer and statesman, tried to develop a methodology 
of investigation for the empirical sciences. What Great Observer 
will produce the methodology of examination for the human 
sciences.^ Unless, of course, such a thing is not possible. For, 
although it is true that, in becoming a technique for the empirical 
sciences, the investigation has detached itself from the inquisitorial 
procedure, in which it was historically rooted, the examination has 
remained extremely close to the disciplinary power that shaped it. 
It has always been and still is an intrinsic element of the disciplines. 
Of course it seems to have undergone a speculative purification by 
integrating itself with such sciences as psychology and psychiatry. 
And, in effect, its appearance in the form of tests, interviews, 
interrogations and consultations is apparently in order to rectify 
the mechanisms of discipline: educational psychology is supposed to 
correct the rigours of the school, just as the medical or psychiatric 
interview is supposed to rectify the effects of the discipline of work. 
But we must not be misled; these techniques merely refer individuals 
from one disciplinary authority to another, and they reproduce, in 


226 



