of the examination, implement, within a single mechanism, power 
relations that make it possible to extract and constitute knowledge.^ 
It is not simply at the level of consciousness, of representations and 
in what one thinks one knows, but at the level of what makes possible 
the knowledge that is transformed into political investment. 

One of the essential conditions for the epistemological ‘thaw’ of 
medicine at the end of the eighteenth century was the organization 
of the hospital as an ‘examining’ apparatus. The ritual of the visit 
was its most obvious form. In the seventeenth century, the physi¬ 
cian, coming from the outside, added his inspection to many other 
controls - religious, administrative, etc.; he hardly participated in 
the everyday administration of the hospital. Gradually, the visit 
became more regular, more rigorous, above all more extended: it 
became an ever more important part of the functioning of the 
hospital. In i66i, the physician of the Hotel-Dieu of Paris was 
called upon to make a daily visit; in 1687, an ‘expectant’ physician 
was to examine, in the afternoon, certain seriously sick patients. 
The eighteenth-century regulations laid down the hours of the visit 
and its duration (at least two hours); they insisted on a rotation of 
physicians, which would guarantee visits every day ‘even on Easter 
Sunday’; at last, in 1771, a resident physician was appointed, charged 
with ‘providing all the services of his state, at night as well as in the 


185 




Discipline 


day, in the intervals between visits by an outside physician’ (Registre 
des deliberations du bureau de VHotel-Dieii). The old form of inspec¬ 
tion, irregular and rapid, was transformed into a regular observation 
that placed the patient in a situation of almost perpetual examina¬ 
tion. This had two consequences: in the internal hierarchy, the 
physician, hitherto an external element, begins to gain over the 
religious staff and to relegate them to a clearly specified, but subor¬ 
dinate role in the technique of the examination; the category of the 
‘nurse’ then appears; while the hospital itself, which was once little 
more than a poorhouse, was to become a place of training and of 
the correlation of knowledge; it represented a reversal therefore of 
the power relations and the constitution of a corpus of knowledge. 
The ‘well-disciplined’ hospital became the physical counterpart of 
the medical ‘discipline’; this discipline could now abandon its textual 
character and take its references not so much from the tradition of 
author-authorities as from a domain of objects perpetually offered 
for examination. 

Similarly, the school became a sort of apparatus of uninterrupted 
examination that duplicated along its entire length the operation of 
teaching. It became less and less a question of jousts in which pupils 
pitched their forces against one another and increasingly a perpetual 
comparison of each and all that made it possible both to measure and 
to judge. The Brothers of the Christian Schools wanted their pupils 
to be examined every day of the week: on the first for spelling, on 
the second for arithmetic, on the third for catechism in the morning 
and for handwriting in the afternoon, etc. Moreover, there was to be 
an examination each month in order to pick out those who deserved 
to be submitted for examination by the inspector (La Salle, Con- 
duite ..., i6o). From 1775, there existed at the Fcole des Fonts et 
Chaussees sixteen examinations a year: three in mathematics, three 
in architecture, three in drawing, two in writing, one in stone¬ 
cutting, one in style, one in surveying, one in levelling, one in 
quantity surveying. The examination did not simply mark the end of 
an apprenticeship; it was one of its permanent factors; it was woven 
into it through a constantly repeated ritual of power. The examina¬ 
tion enabled the teacher, while transmitting his knowledge, to 
transform his pupils into a whole field of knowledge. Whereas the 
examination with which an apprenticeship ended in the guild 




The means of correct training 


tradition validated an acquired aptitude - the ‘master-work’ 
authenticated a transmission of knowledge that had already been 
accomplished - the examination in the school was a constant 
exchanger of knowledge; it guaranteed the movement of knowledge 
from the teacher to the pupil, but it extracted from the pupil a 
knowledge destined and reserved for the teacher. The school became 
the place of elaboration for pedagogy. And just as the procedure of 
the hospital examination made possible the epistemological ‘thaw’ of 
medicine, the age of the ‘examining’ school marked the beginnings 
of a pedagogy that functions as a science. The age of inspections and 
endlessly repeated movements in the army also marked the develop¬ 
ment of an immense tactical knowledge that had its effect in the 
period of the Napoleonic wars. 

The examination introduced a whole mechanism that linked to a 
certain type of the formation of knowledge a certain form of the 
exercise of power. 

I. The examination transformed the economy of visibility into the 
exercise of power. Traditionally, power was what was seen, what was 
shown and what was manifested and, paradoxically, found the 
