operates a differentiation that is not one of acts, but of individuals 
themselves, of their nature, their potentialities, their level or their 
value. By assessing acts with precision, discipline judges individuals 
‘in truth’; the penality that it implements is integrated into the cycle 
of knowledge of individuals. 

5. The distribution according to ranks or grade has a double role: 
it marks the gaps, hierarchizes qualities, skills and aptitudes; but it 
also punishes and rewards. It is the penal functioning of setting in 
order and the ordinal character of judging. Discipline rewards 
simply by the play of awards, thus making it possible to attain 
higher ranks and places; it punishes by reversing this process. Rank 
in itself serves as a reward or punishment. At the ficole Militaire, a 
complex system of ‘honorary’ classification was developed; this 
classification was visible to all in the form of slight variations in 
uniform and more or less noble or ignoble punishments were 
associated, as a mark of privilege or infamy, with the ranks thus 
distributed. This classificatory, penal distribution was carried out 
at short intervals by the reports that the officers, teachers and their 
assistants made, without consideration of age or grade, on ‘the 
moral qualities of the pupils’ and on ‘their universally recognized 
behaviour’. The first class, known as the ‘very good’, were dis¬ 
tinguished by a silver epaulette; they enjoyed the honour of being 
treated as ‘purely military troops’; they therefore had a right to 
military punishment (arrests and, in serious cases, imprisonment). 
The second class, ‘the good’, wore an epaulette of red silk and silver; 
they could be arrested and condemned to prison, but also to the cage 
and to kneeling. The class of'midiocres', had the right to an epaulette 
of red wool; to the preceding penalties was added, if necessary, the 
wearing of sackcloth. The last class, that of the ‘bad’, was marked by 




Discipline 


an epaulette of brown wool; ‘the pupils of this class will be subjected 
to all the punishments used in the Hotel or all those that are thought 
necessary, even solitary confinement in a dark dungeon’. To this 
was added, for a time, the ‘shameful’ class, for which special regula¬ 
tions were drawn up ‘so that those who belonged to it would always 
be separated from the others and would be dressed in sackcloth’. 
Since merit and behaviour alone must decide the place of the pupil, 
‘those of the last two classes would be able to flatter themselves that 
they would be able to rise to the first two and bear its marks, when, 
by universal agreement, they will be recognized as having made 
themselves worthy of it by the change in their conduct and by their 
progress; and those of the top classes will similarly descend into the 
others if they become slack and if the various reports taken together 
are to their disadvantage and show that they no longer deserve the 
rewards and prerogatives of the higher classes. . .’ The penal 
classification should tend to disappear. The ‘shameful’ class existed 
only to disappear: ‘In order to judge the kind of conversion 
undergone by pupils of the shameful class who behave well’, they 
were reintroduced into the other classes, and given back their 
uniforms; but they would remain with their comrades in infamy 
during meals and recreation; they would remain there if they did not 
continue to behave well; they ‘would leave it absolutely, if their 
conduct was considered satisfactory both in this class and in this 
division’ (Archives nationales, MM 658,30 March 1758 and MM 66 < 5 , 
15 September 1763). This hierarchizing penality had, therefore, a 
double effect: it distributed pupils according to their aptitudes and 
their conduct, that is, according to the use that could be made of 
them when they left the school; it exercised over them a constant 
pressure to conform to the same model, so that they might all be 
subjected to ‘subordination, docility, attention in studies and 
exercises, and to the correct practice of duties and all the parts of 
discipline’. So that they might all be like one another. 

In short, the art of punishing, in the regime of disciplinary power, 
is aimed neither at expiation, nor even precisely at repression. It 
brings five quite distinct operations into play: it refers individual 
actions to a whole that is at once a field of comparison, a space of 
differentiation and the principle of a rule to be followed. It differen¬ 
tiates individuals from one another, in terms of the following overall 


182 




The means of correct training 


rule: that the rule be made to function as a minimal threshold, as 
an average to be respected or as an optimum towards which one 
must move. It measures in quantitative terms and hierarchizes in 
terms of value the abilities, the level, the ‘nature’ of individuals. It 
introduces, through this ‘value-giving’ measure, the constraint of 
a conformity that must be achieved. Lastly, it traces the limit 
that will define difference in relation to all other differences, the 
external frontier of the abnormal (the ‘shameful’ class of the ficole 
Militaire). The perpetual penality that traverses all points and 
supervises every instant in the disciplinary institutions compares, 
differentiates, hierarchizes, homogenizes, excludes. In short, it 
normaliies. 

It is opposed, therefore, term by term, to a judicial penality 
