clearer. From where the public is sitting, it is possible to believe in 
the existence of certain cruelties which, in fact, do not take place. 
But the essential point, in all these real or magnified severities, is 
that they should all, according to a strict economy, teach a lesson: 
that each punishment should be a fable. And that, in counterpoint 
with all the direct examples of virtue, one may at each moment 
encounter, as a living spectacle, the misfortunes of vice. Around 
each of these moral ‘representations’, schoolchildren will gather 
with their masters and adults will learn what lessons to teach their 
offspring. The great terrifying ritual of the public execution gives 
way, day after day, street after street, to this serious theatre, with its 
multifarious and persuasive scenes. And popular memory will 
reproduce in rumour the austere discourse of the law. But perhaps 
it will be necessary, above these innumerable spectacles and narra¬ 
tives, to place the major sign of punishment for the most terrible 
of crimes: the keystone of the penal edifice. In any case. Vermeil had 
imagined the scene of absolute punishment that should dominate all 
the theatres of everyday punishment: the only case in which one 
had to seek to reach an infinity of punishment, something equivalent 
in the new penal system to what regicide had been in the old. The 
man found guilty of this crime would have his eyes put out; he 
would be put into an iron cage, suspended in the air, above a public 
square; he would be completely naked; he would be attached to the 


”3 




Punishment 


bars of the cage by an iron belt around his waist; to the end of his 
days, he would be fed on bread and water. ‘Thus he would be 
exposed to all the rigours of the seasons, sometimes his head would 
be covered with snow, sometimes burnt by a scorching sun. It is 
in this energetic torture, presenting rather the extension of a painful 
death than that of a painful life, that one would truly recognize a 
villain deserving of the horror of nature in its entirety, condemned 
to see no longer the heaven that he has outraged and to live no 
longer on the earth that he has sullied’ (Vermeil, 148-9). Above the 
punitive city hangs this iron spider; and the criminal who is to be 
thus crucified by the new law is the parricide. 

There is a whole new arsenal of picturesque punishments. ‘Avoid 
inflicting the same punishments,’ said Mably. The idea of a uniform 
penalty, modulated only according to the gravity of the crime is 
banished. To be more precise: the use of imprisonment as a general 
form of punishment is never presented in these projects for specific, 
visible and ‘telling’ penalties. Imprisonment is envisaged, but as one 
among other penalties; it is the specific punishment for certain 
oflFences, those that infringe the liberty of individuals (such as 
abduction) or those that result from an abuse of liberty (disorder, 
violence). It is also envisaged as a condition to enable certain 
punishments to be carried out (forced labour, for example). But it 
does not cover the whole field of penality with its duration as the 
sole principle of variation. Or rather, the idea of penal imprison¬ 
ment is explicitly criticized by many reformers. Because it is 
incapable of corresponding to the specificity of crimes. Because it 
has no effect on the public. Because it is useless, even harmful, to 
society: it is costly, it maintains convicts in idleness, it multiplies 
their vices (cf. Archives parlementaires, XXVI, 712). Because the 
execution of such a penalty is difficult to supervise and because there 
is a risk of exposing prisoners to the arbitrary will of their guards. 
Because the job of depriving a man of his liberty and of supervising 
him is an exercise of tyranny. ‘You are demanding that there should 
be monsters among you; and if these odious men existed, the legisla¬ 
tor ought perhaps to treat them as murderers’ (Mably, 338). Prison 
as the universal penalty is incompatible with this whole technique 
of penalty-effect, penalty-representation, penalty-general function. 




The gentle way in punishment 

penalty-sign and discourse. It is obscurity, violence and suspicion. 
‘It is a place of darkness in which the citizen’s eye cannot count the 
victims, in which consequently their number is lost as an example. 
... Whereas if, without multiplying crimes, one could multiply the 
example of punishments, one would succeed at last in rendering 
them less necessary; indeed, the obscurity of the prisons becomes 
a subject of defiance for the citizens; they easily suppose that great 
injustices are committed there. . . There is certainly something 
wrong when the law, which is made for the good of the multitude, 
instead of arousing its gratitude, continually arouses its discontent’ 
(Dufriche de Valaze, 344-5). 

The idea that imprisonment might as it does today cover the 
whole middle ground of punishment, between death and light 
penalties, was one that the reformers could not arrive at immediately. 

The problem is the following: within a short space of time, 
detention became the essential form of punishment. In the penal 
code of 1810, between death and fines, it occupies, in a number of 
forms, almost the whole field of possible punishments. ‘What is the 
system of penality accepted by the new law.^ It is incarceration in all 
its forms. Indeed, compare the four principal penalties that remain 
in the penal code. Forced labour is a form of incarceration. The 
