
Prison 


certain specialization, is ‘omni-disciplinary’. Moreover, the prison 
has neither exterior nor gap; it cannot be interrupted, except when 
its task is totally completed; its action on the individual must be 
uninterrupted: an unceasing discipline. Lastly, it gives almost total 
power over the prisoners; it has its internal mechanisms of repression 
and punishment: a despotic discipline. It carries to their greatest 
intensity all the procedures to be found in the other disciplinary 
mechanisms. It must be the most powerful machinery for imposing 
a new form on the perverted individual; its mode of action is the 
constraint of a total education: ‘In prison the government may 
dispose of the liberty of the person and of the time of the prisoner; 
from then on, one can imagine the power of the education which, 
not only in a day, but in the succession of days and even years, may 
regulate for man the time of waking and sleeping, of activity and rest, 
the number and duration of meals, the quality and ration of food, 
the nature and product of labour, the time of prayer, the use of 
speech and even, so to speak, that of thought, that education which, 
in the short, simple journeys from refectory to workshop, from 
workshop to the cell, regulates the movements of the body, and even 
in moments of rest, determines the use of time, the time-table, this 
education, which, in short, takes possession of man as a whole, of 
all the physical and moral faculties that are in him and of the time 
in which he is himself’ (Lucas, II, 123-4). This complete ‘reforma¬ 
tory’ lays down a recoding of existence very different from the mere 
juridical deprivation of liberty and very different, too, from the 
simple mechanism of exempla imagined by the reformers at the time 
of the ideologues. 

I. The first principle was isolation. The isolation of the convict 
from the external world, from everything that motivated the offence, 
from the complicities that facilitated it. The isolation of the prisoners 
from one another. Not only must the penalty be individual, but it 
must also be individualizing - in two ways. First, the prison must be 
designed in such a way as to efface of itself the harmful consequences 
to which it gives rise in gathering together very different convicts 
in the same place: to stifle plots and revolts, to prevent the formation 
of future complicities that may give rise to blackmail (when the 
convicts are once again at liberty), to form an obstacle to the im¬ 
morality of so many ‘mysterious associations’. In short, the prison 


236 



Complete and austere institutions 


should form from the malefactors that it gathers together a homo¬ 
geneous and interdependent population: ‘There exists at this moment 
among us an organized society of criminals ... They form a small 
nation within the greater. Almost all these men met or meet again 
in prison. We must now disperse the members of this society’ 
(Tocqueville, Rapport d la Ckamhre des Diputes, quoted in Beau¬ 
mont and Tocqueville, 392-3). Moreover, through the reflection 
that it gives rise to and the remorse that cannot fail to follow, 
solitude must be a positive instrument of reform: ‘Thrown into 
solitude, the convict reflects. Placed alone in the presence of his 
crime, he learns to hate it, and, if his soul is not yet blunted by evil, 
it is in isolation that remorse will come to assail him’ (Beaumont and 
Tocqueville, 109). Through the fact, too, that solitude assures a 
sort of self-regulation of the penalty and makes possible a spontane¬ 
ous individualization of the punishment: the more the convict is 
capable of reflecting, the more capable he was of committing his 
crime; but, also, the more lively his remorse, the more painful his 
solitude; on the other hand, when he has profoundly repented and 
made amends without the least dissimulation, solitude will no longer 
weigh upon him: ‘Thus, according to this admirable discipline, each 
intelligence and each morality bears within itself the principle and 
measure of a punishment whose error and human fallibility cannot 
alter the certainty and invariable equity ... Is it not in truth like 
the seal of a divine and providential justice.^’ (Aylies, 132-3). Lastly, 
and perhaps above all, the isolation of the convicts guarantees that 
it is possible to exercise over them, with maximum intensity, a 
power that will not be overthrown by any other influence; solitude 
is the primary condition of total submission: ‘Just imagine,’ said 
Charles Lucas, referring to the role of the governor, the instructor, 
the chaplain and other ‘charitable persons’ as regards the isolated 
convict, ‘just imagine the power of human speech intervening in 
the midst of the terrible discipline of silence to speak to the heart, 
to the soul, to the human person’ (Lucas, I, 167). Isolation provides 
an intimate exchange between the convict and the power that is 
exercised over him. 

It is at this point that the debate on the two American systems of 
imprisonment, that of Auburn and that of Philadelphia, was situated. 
In fact, this debate, which was so wide-ranging and long drawn out,* 


237 




Prison 

