


Prison 


by the law has as its principal aim the reparation of the crime, it also 
desires the amendment of the guilty man’ (Real, 244). And this 
transformation must be one of the internal effects of imprisonment. 
Prison-punishment, prison-apparatus: ‘The order that must reign in 
the mcuson deforce may contribute powerfully to the regeneration 
of the convicts; the vices of upbringing, the contagion of bad 
example, idleness ... have given birth to crime. Well, let us try to 
close up all these sources of corruption; let the rules of a healthy 
morality be practised in the maisons de force-, that, compelled to work, 
convicts may come in the end to like it; when they have reaped the 
reward, they will acquire the habit, the taste, the need for occupa¬ 
tion; let them give each other the example of a laborious life; it will 
soon become a pure life; soon they will begin to know regret for the 
past, the first harbinger of a love of duty.’* The techniques of cor¬ 
rection immediately form part of the institutional framework of 
penal detention. 

One should also recall that the movement for reforming the pri¬ 
sons, for controlling their functioning is not a recent phenomenon. 
It does not even seem to have originated in a recognition of failure. 
Prison ‘reform’ is virtually contemporary with the prison itself: it 
constitutes, as it were, its programme. From the outset, the prison 
was caught up in a series of accompanying mechanisms, whose 
purpose was apparently to correct it, but which seem to form part 
of its very functioning, so closely have they been bound up with its 
existence throughout its long history. There was, at once, a prolix 
technology of the prison. There were inquiries: that of Chaptal in 
i8oi (whose task it was to discover what could be used to introduce 
the modern prison system into France), that of Decazes in 1819, 
Villerme’s work published in 1820, the report on the maisons cen¬ 
trales drawn up by Martignac in 1829, the inquiries carried out in 
the United States by Beaumont and Tocqueville in 1831, by Demetz 
and Blouet in 1835, the questionnaires addressed by Montalivet to 
the directors of the maisons centrales and to the general councils of 
the dipartements during the debate on solitary confinement. There 
were societies for supervising the functioning of the prisons and for 
suggesting improvements: in 1818, the very official SocUti pour 
Vamelioration des prisons, a little later the Sociiti des prisons and 
various philanthropic groups. Innumerable measures - orders. 


234 




Complete and austere institutions 


instructions or laws: from the reform that the first Restoration had 
envisaged in September 1814, and which was never implemented, to 
the law of 1844, drawn up by Tocqueville, which ended for a time 
the long debate on the means of making imprisonment effective. 
There were programmes drawn up to improve the functioning of 
the machine-prison:® programmes for the treatment of the prisoners, 
models for material improvement, some of these, like those of 
Danjou and Harou-Romain, remaining no more than projects, 
others becoming embodied in instructions (like the circular of 9 
August 1841 on the building of maisons d’arret), others becoming 
actual buildings, such as the Petite Roquette in which cellular 
imprisonment was organized for the first time in France. 

To these should be added the publications that sprang more or 
less directly from the prison and were drawn up either by philan¬ 
thropists like Appert, or a little later by ‘specialists’ (such as the 
Armales de la CharidY or, again, by former prisoners; Pauvre 
Jacques at the end of the Restoration, or the Gazette de Sainte- 
Pilagie at the beginning of the July monarchy.® 

The prison should not be seen as an inert institution, shaken at 
intervals by reform movements. The ‘theory of the prison’ was its 
constant set of operational instructions rather than its incidental 
criticism - one of its conditions of functioning. The prison has 
always formed part of an active field in which projects, improve¬ 
ments, experiments, theoretical statements, personal evidence and 
investigations have proliferated. The prison institution has always 
been a focus of concern and debate. Is the prison still, then, a dark, 
abandoned region.^ Is the fact that one has ceased to say so for 
almost 200 years sufficient proof that it is not.^ In becoming a legal 
punishment, it weighted the old juridico-political question of the 
right to punish with all the problems, all the agitations that have 
surrounded the corrective technologies of the individual. 

Baltard called them ‘complete and austere institutions’ (Baltard, 
1829). In several respects, the prison must be an exhaustive disciplin¬ 
ary apparatus: it must assume responsibility for all aspects of the 
individual, his physical training, his aptitude to work, his everyday 
conduct, his moral attitude, his state of mind; the prison, much more 
than the school, the workshop or the army, which always involved a 


i35 


