repetition of the crime, what one was aiming at was not the author 
of an act defined by law, but the delinquent subject himself, a certain 
will that manifested his intrinsically criminal character. Gradually, 
as criminality, rather than crime, became the object of penal inter¬ 
vention, the opposition between first oflFender and recidivist tended 
to become more important. And on the basis of this opposition, 
reinforcing it on several points, one sees at the same period the 
formation of the notion of the 'crime passioneV - an involuntary, 
unpremeditated crime, bound up with extraordinary circumstances, 
which, while not offering the same excuse as madness, nevertheless 
prevented it from being regarded as an ordinary crime. As early as 
1791, Le Peletier remarked that the subtle gradation of penalties 
that he had presented to the Constituent Assembly might dissuade 
from crime ‘the evil-doer who plans a wicked action in cold blood’, 
and who may be restrained by thoughts of the penalty; but, on the 


100 




Generalized punishment 


other hand, it was powerless against crimes due to ‘violent passions 
that have no regard to consequences’; this, however, was unimport¬ 
ant, since such crimes revealed in their authors ‘no reasoned wicked¬ 
ness.’** 

Beneath the humanization of the penalties, what one finds are all 
those rules that authorize, or rather demand, ‘leniency’, as a calcu¬ 
lated economy of the power to punish. But they also provoke a 
shift in the point of application of this power: it is no longer the 
body, with the ritual play of excessive pains, spectacular brandings 
in the ritual of the public execution; it is the mind or rather a play 
of representations and signs circulating discreetly but necessarily 
and evidently in the minds of all. It is no longer the body, but the 
soul, said Mably. And we see very clearly what he meant by this 
term; the correlative of a technique of power. Old ‘anatomies’ of 
punishment are abandoned. But have we really entered the age of 
non-corporal punishment.^ 

At the point of departure, then, one may place the political 
project of rooting out illegalities, generalizing the punitive function 
and delimiting, in order to control it, the power to punish. From 
this there emerge two lines of objectification of crime and of the 
criminal. On the one hand, the criminal designated as the enemy of 
all, whom it is in the interest of all to track down, falls outside the 
pact, disqualifies himself as a citizen and emerges, bearing within 
him as it were, a wild fragment of nature; he appears as a villain, 
a monster, a madman, perhaps, a sick and, before long, ‘abnormal’ 
individual. It is as such that, one day, he will belong to a scientific 
objectification and to the ‘treatment’ that is correlative to it. On the 
other hand, the need to measure, from within, the effects of the 
punitive power prescribes tactics of intervention over all criminals, 
actual or potential; the organization of a field of prevention, the 
calculation of interests, the circulation of representations and signs, 
the constitution of a horizon of certainty and proof, the adjustment 
of penalties to ever more subtle variables; all this also leads to an 
objectification of criminals and crimes. In either case, one sees that 
the power relation that underlies the exercise of punishment begins 
to be duplicated by an object relation in which are caught up not 
only the crime as a fact to be established according to common 


lOI 



Punishment 


norms, but the criminal as an individual to be known according 
to specific criteria. One also sees that this object relation is not 
superimposed, from the outside, on the punitive practice, as would 
be a prohibition laid on the fury of the public execution by the 
limits of the sensibility, or as would be a rational or ‘scientific’ 
interrogation as to what this man that one is punishing really is. The 
processes of objectification originate in the very tactics of power and 
of the arrangement of its exercise. 

However, the two types of objectification that emerge with the 
project of penal reform are very different from one another: both in 
their chronology and in their effects. The objectification of the 
criminal as outside the law, as natural man, is still only a potentiality, 
a vanishing trace, in which are entangled the themes of political 
criticism and the figures of the imagination. One will have to wait a 
long time before homo criminalis becomes a definite object in the 
field of knowledge. The other, on the contrary, has had much more 
rapid and decisive effects in so far as it was linked more directly 
to the reorganization of the power to punish; codification, definition 
of offences, the fixing of a scale of penalties, rules of procedure, 
definition of the role of magistrates. And also because it made use 
of the discourse already constituted by the Ideologues. This discourse 
provided, in effect, by means of the theory of interests, representa¬ 
tions and signs, by the series and geneses that it reconstituted, a sort 
of general recipe for the exercise of power over men: the ‘mind’ as 
a surface of inscription for power, with semiology as its tool; the 
submission of bodies through the control of ideas; the analysis of 
