tained as the physical yet intangible support of the kingdom; 
around this duality, which was originally close to the Christological 
model, are organized an iconography, a political theory of monarchy, 
legal mechanisms that distinguish between as well as link the person 


28 




The body of the condemned 


of the king and the demands of the Crown, and a whole ritual that 
reaches its height in the coronation, the funeral and the ceremonies 
of submission. At the opposite pole one might imagine placing the 
body of the condemned man; he, too, has his legal status; he gives 
rise to his own ceremonial and he calls forth a whole theoretical 
discourse, not in order to ground the ‘surplus power’ possessed by 
the person of the sovereign, but in order to code the ‘lack of power’ 
with which those subjected to punishment are marked. In the darkest 
region of the political field the condemned man represents the sym¬ 
metrical, inverted figure of the king. We should analyse what might 
be called, in homage to Kantorowitz, ‘the least body of the con¬ 
demned man’. 

If the surplus power possessed by the king gives rise to the 
duplication of his body, has not the surplus power exercised on the 
subjected body of the condemned man given rise to another type of 
duplication.^ That of a ‘non-corporal’, a ‘soul’, as Mably called it. 
The history of this ‘micro-physics’ of the punitive power would then 
be a genealogy or an element in a genealogy of the modern ‘soul’. 
Rather than seeing this soul as the reactivated remnants of an ideo- 
one would see it as the present correlative of a certain tech¬ 
nology of power over the body. It would be wrong to say that the 
soul is an illusion, or an ideological effect. On the contrary, it exists, 
it has a reality, it is produced permanently around, on, within the 
body by the functioning of a power that is exercised on those 
punished - and, in a more general way, on those one supervises, 
trains and corrects, over madmen, children at home and at school, 
the colonized, over those who are stuck at a machine and supervised 
for the rest of their lives. This is the historical reality of this soul, 
which, unlike the soul represented by Christian theology, is not 
born in sin and subject to punishment, but is born rather out of 
methods of punishment, supervision and constraint. This real, non¬ 
corporal soul is not a substance; it is the element in which are 
articulated the effects of a certain type of power and the reference 
of a certain type of knowledge, the machinery by which the power 
relations give rise to a possible corpus of knowledge, and knowledge 
extends and reinforces the effects of this power. On this reality- 
reference, various concepts have been constructed and domains of 
analysis carved out: psyche, subjectivity, personality, consciousness. 


29 




Torture 


etc.; on it have been built scientific techniques and discourses, 
and the moral claims of humanism. But let there be no misunder¬ 
standing: it is not that a real man, the object of knowledge, philo¬ 
sophical reflection or technical intervention, has been substituted 
for the soul, the illusion of the theologians. The man described for 
us, whom we are invited to free, is already in himself the effect of a 
subjection much more profound than himself. A ‘soul’ inhabits him 
and brings him to existence, which is itself a factor in the mastery 
that power exercises over the body. The soul is the effect and 
instrument of a political anatomy; the soul is the prison of the body. 

That punishment in general and the prison in particular belong 
to a political technology of the body is a lesson that I have learnt 
not so much from history as from the present. In recent years, 
prison revolts have occurred throughout the world. There was cer¬ 
tainly something paradoxical about their aims, their slogans and the 
way they took place. They were revolts against an entire state of 
physical misery that is over a century old: against cold, suffocation 
and overcrowding, against decrepit walls, hunger, physical mal¬ 
treatment. But they were also revolts against model prisons, tran¬ 
quillizers, isolation, the medical or educational services. Were they 
revolts whose aims were merely material.^ Or contradictory revolts: 
against the obsolete, but also against comfort; against the warders, 
but also against the psychiatrists.^ In fact, all these movements - and 
the innumerable discourses that the prison has given rise to since 
the early nineteenth century - have been about the body and 
material things. What has sustained these discourses, these mem¬ 
ories and invectives are indeed those minute material details. One 
may, if one is so disposed, see them as no more than blind demands 
or suspect the existence behind them of alien strategies. In fact, they 
were revolts, at the level of the body, against the very body of the 
prison. What was at issue was not whether the prison environment 
was too harsh or too aseptic, too primitive or too efficient, but its 
very materiality as an instrument and vector of power; it is this 
whole technology of power over the body that the technology of 
the ‘soul’ - that of the educationalists, psychologists and psychia¬ 
trists - fails either to conceal or to compensate, for the simple reason 
