to pass from the project stage to that of an institution and set of 
practices. That is to say, although the new criminal legislation 
appears to be characterized by less severe penalties, a clearer codi¬ 
fication, a marked diminution of the arbitrary, a more generally 
accepted consensus concerning the power to punish (in the absence 
of a more real division in its exercise), it is sustained in reality by an 
upheaval in the traditional economy of illegalities and a rigorous 
application of force to maintain their new adjustment. A penal sys¬ 
tem must be confceived as a mechanism intended to administer 
illegalities differentially, not to eliminate them all. 

Shift the object and change the scale. Define new tactics in order 
to reach a target that is now more subtle but also more widely spread 
in the social body. Find new techniques for adjusting punishment to 
it and for adapting its effects. Lay down new principles for regulariz¬ 
ing, refining, universalizing the art of punishing. Homogenize its 
application. Reduce its economic and political cost by increasing its 
effectiveness and by multiplying its circuits. In short, constitute a 
new economy and a new technology of the power to punish: these 
are no doubt the essential raisons d’etre of penal reform in the 
eighteenth century. 

At the level of principles, this new strategy falls easily into the 
general theory of the contract. The citizen is presumed to have 
accepted once and for all, with the laws of society, the very law by 


89 



Punishment 


which he may be punished. Thus the criminal appears as a juridically 
paradoxical being. He has broken the pact, he is therefore the enemy 
of society as a whole, but he participates in the punishment that is 
practised upon him. The least crime attacks the whole of society; 
and the whole of society - including the criminal - is present in the 
least punishment. Penal punishment is therefore a generalized 
function, coextensive with the function of the social body and with 
each of its elements. This gives rise to the problem of the degree of 
punishment, the economy of the power to punish. 

In effect the offence opposes an individual to the entire social 
body; in order to punish him, society has the right to oppose him 
in its entirety. It is an unequal struggle: on one side are all the forces, 
all the power, all the rights. And this is how it should be, since the 
defence of each individual is involved. Thus a formidable right to 
punish is established, since the offender becomes the common 
