body of knowledge that could project their schema over the social 
body. If there is a politics-war series that passes through strategy, 
there is an army-politics series that passes through tactics. It is 
strategy that makes it possible to understand warfare as a way of 
conducting politics between states; it is tactics that makes it possible 
to understand the army as a principle for maintaining the absence of 
warfare in civil society. The classical age saw the birth of the great 
political and military strategy by which nations confronted each 
other’s economic and demographic forces; but it also saw the birth 
of meticulous military and political tactics by which the control of 
bodies and individual forces was exercised within states. The 
‘militaire - the military institution, military science, the militaire 
himself, so different from what was formerly characterized by the 
term 'homme de guerre' - was specified, during this period, at the 
point of junction between war and the noise of battle on the one 
hand, and order and silence, subservient to peace, on the other. 




Docile bodies 


Historians of ideas usually attribute the dream of a perfect society to 
the philosophers and jurists of the eighteenth century; but there was 
also a military dream of society; its fundamental reference was not to 
the state of nature, but to the meticulously subordinated cogs of a 
machine, not to the primal social contract, but to permanent coer¬ 
cions, not to fundamental rights, but to indefinitely progressive 
forms of training, not to the general will but to automatic docility. 

‘Discipline must be made national,’ said Guibert. ‘The state that 
I depict will have a simple, reliable, easily controlled administration. 
It will resemble those huge machines, which by quite uncomplicated 
means produce great effects; the strength of this state will spring 
from its own strength, its prosperity from its own prosperity. Time, 
which destroys all, will increase its power. It will disprove that 
vulgar prejudice by which we are made to imagine that empires are 
subjected to an imperious law of decline and ruin’ (Guibert, xxiii- 
xxiv; cf. what Marx says about the army and forms of bourgeois 
society in his letter to Engels, 25 September 1857). The Napoleonic 
regime was not far off and with it the form of state that was to 
survive it and, we must not forget, the foundations of which were 
laid not only by jurists, but also by soldiers, not only councillors of 
state, but also junior officers, not only tlie men of the courts, but also 
the men of the camps. The Roman reference that accompanied this 
formation certainly bears with it this double index: citizens and 
legionaries, law and manoeuvres. While jurists or philosophers 
were seeking in the pact a primal model for the construction or 
reconstruction of the social body, the soldiers and with them the 
