theoretical identification made the king the fons justitiae; but the 
practical consequences of this were to be found even in that which 
appeared to oppose him and to limit his absolutism. It was because 
the king, in order to raise money, had appropriated the right to sell 
legal offices, which ‘belonged’ to him, that he was confronted by 
magistrates who owned their offices and who were not only intract¬ 
able, but ignorant, self-interested and frequently compromised. It 
was because he was constantly creating new offices that he multiplied 
the conflicts of power and authority. It was because he exercised too 
close a power over his ‘gens' and conferred on them almost dis¬ 
cretionary powers that he intensified the conflicts within the magis- 
trature. It was because he had brought the law into conflict with too 
many summary acts of justice (the jurisdictions of the provosts or 
police magistrates) or with administrative measures, that he para¬ 
lysed normal justice, rendered it sometimes lenient and inconsistent, 
but sometimes over-hasty and severe.® 

It was not so much, or not only, the privileges of justice, its 
arbitrariness, its archaic arrogance, its uncontrolled rights that were 
criticized; but rather the mixture of its weaknesses and excesses, its 
exaggerations and its loopholes, and above all the very principle of 
this mixture, the ‘super-power’ of the monarch. The true objective 
of the reform movement, even in its most general formulations, was 
not so much to establish a new right to punish based on more 
equitable principles, as to set up a new ‘economy’ of the power to 
punish, to assure its better distribution, so that it should be neither 
too concentrated at certain privileged points, nor too divided be¬ 
tween opposing authorities; so that it should be distributed in 
homogeneous circuits capable of operating everywhere, in a con¬ 
tinuous way, down to the finest grain of the social body.* The 
reform of criminal law must be read as a strategy for the rearrange¬ 
ment of the power to punish, according to modalities that render 
it more regular, more effective, more constant and more detailed in 
its effects; in short, which increase its effects while diminishing its 


8o 




Generalized punishment 


economic cost (that is to say, by dissociating it from the system of 
property, of buying and selling, of corruption in obtaining not only 
offices, but the decisions themselves) and its political cost (by dis¬ 
sociating it from the arbitrariness of monarchical power). The new 
juridical theory of penality corresponds in fact to a new ‘political 
economy’ of the power to punish. This explains why the ‘reform’ 
did not have a single origin. It was not the more enlightened mem¬ 
bers of the public, nor the philosophes, who regarded themselves as 
enemies of despotism and friends of mankind; it was not even the 
social groups opposed to the parlementaires who instigated the 
reform. Or rather it was not they alone; in this same overall project 
of a new distribution of the power to punish, and of a new distribu¬ 
tion of its effects, many different interests came together. The reform 
was not prepared outside the legal machinery and against all its 
representatives; it was prepared, for the most part, from within, by 
a large number of magistrates and on the basis of shared objectives 
and the power conflicts that divided them. Certainly the reformers 
did not form a majority of the magistrates; but it was a body of 
lawyers who outlined its general principles: a power to judge that 
would not be affected by the immediate exercise of the prince’s 
sovereignty; that would be relieved of any claim to legislate; that 
would be detached from property relations; and which, having no 
other functions but to judge, would exercise that power to the full. 
In short, the power to judge should no longer depend on the 
innumerable, discontinuous, sometimes contradictory privileges of 
sovereignty, but on the continuously distributed effects of public 
power. This general principle defined an overall strategy that 
covered many different struggles. Those of philosophers like 
Voltaire and of publicists like Brissot or Marat; but also those of 
magistrates whose interests were nevertheless very diverse: Le 
Trosne, a judge at the presidial court of Orleans, and Lacretelle, the 
advocate-general at the parlement; Target, who with the parlements 
was opposed to Maupeou’s reform; but also J. N. Moreau, who 
supported the royal power against the parlementaires-, Servan and 
Dupaty, both magistrates, but in conflict with their colleagues, etc. 

Throughout the eighteenth century, inside and outside the legal 
apparatus, in both everyday penal practice and the criticism of 
institutions, one sees the emergence of a new strategy for the 


8i 




Punishment 


exercise of the power to punish. And ‘reform’, in the strict sense, as 
it was formulated in the theories of law or as it was outlined in the 
various projects, was the political or philosophical resumption of 
this strategy, with its primary objectives: to make of the punishment 
and repression of illegalities a regular function, coextensive with 
society; not to punish less, but to punish better; to punish with an 
attenuated severity perhaps, but in order to punish with more 
