with a profound knowledge of mankind’ (Berenger). 

And so we arrive at a principle, clearly formulated by Charles 
Lucas, which, although it marks the virtual beginning of modern 
penal functioning, very few jurists would dare to accept today 
without some hesitation; let us call it the Declaration of Carceral 
Independence - in it is claimed the right to be a power that not only 
possesses administrative autonomy, but is also a part of punitive 
sovereignty. This affirmation of the rights of the prison posits as a 
principle: that criminal judgement is an arbitrary unity; that it must 
be broken down; that the writers of the penal codes were correct in 
distinguishing the legislative level (which classifies the acts and attri¬ 
butes penalties to them) and the judicial level (which passes the 
sentences); that the task today is to analyse in turn this later judicial 
level; that one should distinguish in it what is properly judicial 
(assess not so much acts as agents, measure ‘the intentionalities that 
give human acts so many different moralities’, and therefore rectify 
if it can the assessments of the legislator); and to give autonomy to 
‘penitentiary judgement’, which is perhaps the most important; in 
relation to it the assessment of the court is merely a ‘way of pre¬ 
judging’, for the morality of the agent can be assessed ‘only when 
put to the test. The judge, therefore, requires in turn a compulsory 
and rectifying supervision of his assessments; and this supervision 
is that provided by the penitentiary prison’ (Lucas, II, 418-22). 

One may speak, therefore, of an excess or a series of excesses on 
the part of imprisonment in terms of legal detention - of the ‘car- 
ceral’ in relation to the ‘judicial’. Now this excess was observed very 
early on, from the very birth of the prison, either in the form of real 
practices, or in the form of projects. It did not come later, as a 
secondary effect. The great carceral machinery was bound up with 


247 




Prison 


the very functioning of the prison. The sign of this autonomy is 
very apparent in the ‘useless’ acts of violence perpetrated by warders 
or in the despotism of an administration that has all the privileges of 
an enclosed community. Its roots lie elsewhere: precisely in the fact 
that the prison is required to be ‘useful’, that the deprivation of 
liberty — that juridical levying on an ideal property - must, from 
the outset, have exercised a positive technical role, operating trans¬ 
formations on individuals. And, for this operation, the carceral 
apparatus has recourse to three great schemata: the politico-moral 
