40 




The spectacle of the scaffold 


confess, the magistrate was forced to drop the charges. The tortured 
man had then won. Hence the custom, which had been introduced 
for the most serious cases, of imposing judicial torture ‘pending 
proof’: in this case the magistrate could continue with his investiga¬ 
tion after the torture had failed; the suspect was not declared 
innocent by his resistance; but at least his victory saved him from 
being condemned to death. The judge kept all his cards, except the 
principal one. Omnia citra morum. Hence the recommendation 
often made to magistrates, in the case of the most serious crimes, 
not to subject to judicial torture a suspect against whom the evidence 
was sufficiently convincing for, if he managed to resist the torture, 
the magistrate would no longer have the right to pass the death 
sentence, which he nevertheless deserved; in such a joust, justice 
would be the loser: if the evidence was sufficient ‘to condemn such a 
guilty person to death’, one should not ‘leave the conviction to 
chance and to the outcome of a provisional interrogation that often 
leads to nothing; for it is in the interest of public safety to make 
examples of grave, horrible and capital crimes’ (Rousseaud de la 
Combe, 503). 

Beneath an apparently determined, impatient search for truth, 
one finds in classical torture the regulated mechanism of an ordeal: 
a physical challenge that must define the truth; if the patient is 
guilty, the pains that it imposes are not unjust; but it is also a mark 
of exculpation if he is innocent. In the practice of torture, pain, 
confrontation and truth were bound together: they worked to¬ 
gether on the patient’s body. The search for truth through judicial 
torture was certainly a way of obtaining evidence, the most serious 
of all - the confession of the guilty person; but it was also the battle, 
and this victory of one adversary over the other, that ‘produced’ 
truth according to a ritual. In torture employed to extract a con¬ 
fession, there was an element of the investigation; there also was an 
element of the duel. 

It is as if investigation and punishment had become mixed. And 
this is not the least paradoxical thing about it. Judicial torture was 
indeed defined as a way of complementing the demonstration when 
‘there are not sufficient penalties in the trial’. For it was included 
among the penalties; it was a penalty so grave that, in the hierarchy 
of punishments, the ordinance of 1760 placed it immediately after 


