the ropes and thrown on the stake set up in the enclosure in line 
with the scaffold, then the trunk and the rest were covered with logs 
and faggots, and fire was put to the straw mixed with this wood. 

‘... In accordance with the decree, the whole was reduced to 
ashes. The last piece to be found in the embers was still burning at 
half-past ten in the evening. The pieces of flesh and the trunk had 
taken about four hours to burn. The officers of whom I was one, 
as also was my son, and a detachment of archers remained in the 
square until nearly eleven o’clock. 

‘There were those who made something of the fact that a dog 
had lain the day before on the grass where the fire had been, had 
been chased away several times, and had always returned. But it is 


5 




Torture 


not difficult to understand that an animal found this place warmer 
than elsewhere’ (quoted in Zevaes, 201-14). 

Eighty years later, Leon Faucher drew up his rules ‘for the House 
of young prisoners in Paris’: 

‘Art. 17. The prisoners’ day will begin at six in the morning in 
winter and at five in summer. They will work for nine hours a day 
throughout the year. Two hours a day will be devoted to instruc¬ 
tion. Work and the day will end at nine o’clock in winter and at 
eight in summer. 

Art. 18. Rising. At the first drum-roll, the prisoners must rise and 
dress in silence, as the supervisor opens the cell doors. At the second 
drum-roll, they must be dressed and make their beds. At the third, 
they must line up and proceed to the chapel for morning prayer. 
There is a five-minute interval between each drum-roll. 

Art. 19. The prayers are conducted by the chaplain and followed 
by a moral or religious reading. This exercise must not last more 
than half an hour. 

Art. 20. Work. At a quarter to six in the summer, a quarter to 
seven in winter, the prisoners go down into the courtyard where 
they must wash their hands and faces, and receive their first ration 
of bread. Immediately afterwards, they form into work-teams and 
