unable to quarter his patient according to the rules, had to cut him 
up with a knife; as a result, Damiens’s hair, which had been prom¬ 
ised to him, was confiscated and the money obtained from the sale 
given to the poor. Some years later, an executioner at Avignon 
caused excessive pain to three bandits, who were nevertheless 
formidable characters, whom he had to hang; the spectators became 
angry; they denounced him; in order to punish him and also to 
protect him from mob violence, he was put into prison (Duhamel, 
23). And, behind this punishment of the unskilful executioner, 
stands a tradition, which is still close to us, according to which the 
condemned man should be pardoned if the execution happened to 
fail. It was a custom clearly established in certain countries: in 
Burgundy, for instance (cf. Chassanee, 53). The people often 
expected it to be applied, and would sometimes protect a condemned 
man who had escaped death in this way. In order to abolish both 
custom and expectation, they had to revive the adage, ‘the gibbet 
does not lose its prey’, to introduce explicit instructions in capital 
sentences, such as ‘hanged by the neck until he be dead’. And jurists 
like Serpillon or Blackstone were insisting in the middle of the 
eighteenth century that a failure on the part of the executioner did 
not mean that the condemned man’s life was spared (Serpillon, III, 
1100). In his Commentaries on the Laws of England, Blackstone 
remarks: ‘It is clear, that if, upon judgement to be hanged by the 
neck till he is dead, the criminal be not thoroughly killed, but 
revives, the sheriff must hang him again. For the former hanging 
was no execution of the sentence; and, if a false tenderness were to 
be indulged in such cases, a multimde of collusions might ensue’ 
(Blackstone, 199). There was something of the ordeal and something 
of God’s judgement that was still indecipherable in the ceremony of 
execution. In his confrontation with the condemned man, the execu¬ 
tioner was a little like the king’s champion. Yet he was an unacknow- 
ledgeable and unacknowledged champion: the tradition was, it seems, 
that when the executioner’s letters were sealed, they were not placed 
on the table, but thrown on the ground. The various prohibitions 


52 




The spectacle of the scaffold 


surrounding this ‘very necessary’ yet ‘unnatural’ office are well 
known (Loyseau, 80-81). The executioner may have been, in a 
sense, the king’s sword, but he shared the infamy of his adversary. 
The sovereign power that enjoined him to kill, and which through 
him did kill, was not present in him; it was not identified with his 
own ruthlessness. And it never appeared with more spectacular 
