non-individualizing character of casuistry, cf. Cariou.) But what 
was now beginning to emerge was a modulation that referred to the 
defendant himself, to his nature, to his way of life and his attitude of 
mind, to his past, to the ‘quality’ and not to the intention of his will. 
One perceives, but as a place as yet unfilled, the locus in which, in 
penal practice, psychological knowledge will take over the role of 
casuistic jurisprudence. Of course, at the end of the eighteenth 
century, that moment was still far off. The code-individualization 
link was sought in the scientific models of the period. Natural 
history no doubt offered the most adequate schema: the taxonomy 
of species according to an uninterrupted gradation. One sought to 
constitute a Linnaeus of crimes and punishments, so that each 
particular offence and each punishable individual might come, with¬ 
out the slightest risk of any arbitrary action, within the provisions 
of a general law. ‘A table must be drawn up of all the genera of 
crimes to be observed in different countries. According to the 


99 




Punishment 


enumeration of crimes, a division into species must be carried out. 
The best rule of this division is, it seems to me, to separate the 
crimes according to their objects. This division must be such that 
each species is quite distinct from another, and that each particular 
crime, considered in all its relations may be placed between that 
which must precede it and that which must follow it, in the strictest 
gradation; lastly, this table must be such that it may be compared 
with another table that will be drawn up for penalties, in such a way 
that they may correspond exactly to one another’ (Lacretelle, 351- 
352). In theory, or rather in dream, the double taxonomy of 
punishments and crimes will solve the problem: but how is one to 
apply fixed laws to particular individuals.^ 

Far removed from this speculative model, forms of anthropologi¬ 
cal individualization were being constituted at the same period in 
what was still a very rough and ready way. Let us take first the 
notion of the repetition of crime. Not that this was unknown to the 
old criminal laws.^i But it was tending to become a description 
of the defendant himself capable of altering the sentence passed: 
according to the legislation of 1791, recidivists were liable in almost 
all cases to a doubling of the penalty; according to the law of Floreal 
Year X, they had to be branded with the letter R; and the penal code 
of 1810 inflicted on them either the maximum possible of the normal 
penalty, or the penalty immediately above it. Now, through the 
