eighteenth century, the peace-time army exceeded 200,000 men). 
The other aspect of the conjuncture was the growth in the apparatus 
of production, which was becoming more and more extended and 
complex; it was also becoming more costly and its profitability had 
to be increased. The development of the disciplinary methods 
corresponded to these two processes, or rather, no doubt, to the new 
need to adjust their correlation. Neither the residual forms of feudal 
power nor the structures of the administrative monarchy, nor the 
local mechanisms of supervision, nor the unstable, tangled mass 
they all formed together could carry out this role: they were 
hindered from doing so by the irregular and inadequate extension of 


218 



Panopticism 

their network, by their often conflicting functioning, but above all 
by the ‘costly’ nature of the power that was exercised in them. It 
was costly in several senses: because directly it cost a great deal to 
the Treasury; because the system of corrupt offices and farmed-out 
taxes weighed indirectly, but very heavily, on the population; 
because the resistance it encountered forced it into a cycle of per¬ 
petual reinforcement; because it proceeded essentially by levying 
(levying on money or products by royal, seigniorial, ecclesiastical 
taxation; levying on men or time by corvies of press-ganging, by 
locking up or banishing vagabonds). The development of the disci¬ 
plines marks the appearance of elementary techniques belonging to 
a quite different economy: mechanisms of power which, instead of 
proceeding by deduction, are integrated into the productive effi¬ 
ciency of the apparatuses from within, into the growth of this 
efficiency and into the use of what it produces. For the old principle 
of ‘levying-violence’, which governed the economy of power, the 
disciplines substitute the principle of ‘mildness-production-profit’. 
These are the techniques that make it possible to adjust the multi¬ 
plicity of men and the multiplication of the apparatuses of produc¬ 
tion (and this means not only ‘production’ in the strict sense, but 
also the production of knowledge and skills in the school, the 
production of health in the hospitals, the production of destructive 
force in the army). 

In this task of adjustment, discipline had to solve a number of 
problems for which the old economy of power was not sufficiently 
equipped. It could reduce the inefficiency of mass phenomena: 
reduce what, in a multiplicity, makes it much less manageable than 
a unity; reduce what is opposed to the use of each of its elements 
and of their sum; reduce everything that may counter the advantages 
of number. That is why discipline fixes; it arrests or regulates 
movements; it clears up confusion; it dissipates compact groupings 
of individuals wandering about the country in unpredictable ways; 
it establishes calculated distributions. It must also master all the 
forces that are formed from the very constitution of an organized 
multiplicity; it must neutralize the effects of counter-power that 
spring from them and which form a resistance to the power that 
wishes to dominate it: agitations, revolts, spontaneous organizations, 
coalitions - anything that may establish horizontal conjunctions. 


219 




Discipline 


Hence the fact that the disciplines use procedures of partitioning 
and verticality, that they introduce, between the different elements 
at the same level, as solid separations as possible, that they define 
compact hierarchical networks, in short, that they oppose to the 
intrinsic, adverse force of multiplicity the technique of the continu¬ 
ous, individualizing pyramid. They must also increase the particular 
utility of each element of the multiplicity, but by means that are the 
most rapid and the least costly, that is to say, by using the multi¬ 
plicity itself as an instrument of this growth. Hence, in order to 
extract from bodies the maximum time and force, the use of those 
overall methods known as time-tables, collective training, exercises, 
total and detailed surveillance. Furthermore, the disciplines must 
increase the effect of utility proper to the multiplicities, so that each 
is made more useful than the simple sum of its elements: it is in 
order to increase the utilizable effects of the multiple that the disci¬ 
plines define tactics of distribution, reciprocal adjustment of bodies, 
gestures and rhythms, differentiation of capacities, reciprocal co¬ 
ordination in relation to apparatuses or tasks. Lastly, the disciplines 
have to bring into play the power relations, not above but inside 
the very texture of the multiplicity, as discreetly as possible, as well 
articulated on the other functions of these multiplicities and also in 
the least expensive way possible: to this correspond anonymous 
instruments of power, coextensive with the multiplicity that they 
regiment, such as hierarchical surveillance, continuous registration, 
perpetual assessment and classification. In short, to substitute for a 
power that is manifested through the brilliance of those who exercise 
it, a power that insidiously objectifies those on whom it is applied; 
to form a body of knowledge about these individuals, rather than to 
deploy the ostentatious signs of sovereignty. In a word, the disci¬ 
plines are the ensemble of minute technical inventions that made it 
possible to increase the useful size of multiplicities by decreasing the 
inconveniences of the power which, in order to make them useful, 
