eighteenth century had sought, when the problem of the accumula¬ 
tion and useful administration of men first emerged. 

By operating at every level of the social body and by mingling 
ceaselessly the art of rectifying and the right to punish, the universal¬ 
ity of the carceral lowers the level from which it becomes natural 
and acceptable to be punished. The question is often posed as to 
how, before and after the Revolution, a new foundation was given 
to the right to punish. And no doubt the answer is to be found in 
the theory of the contract. But it is perhaps more important to ask 
the reverse question: how were people made to accept the power to 
punish, or quite simply, when punished, tolerate being so. The 
theory of the contract can only answer this question by the fiction 
of a juridical subject giving to others the power to exercise over him 
the right that he himself possesses over them. It is highly probable 
that the great carceral continuum, which provides a communication 
between the power of discipline and the power of the law, and 
extends without interruption from the smallest coercions to the 
longest penal detention, constituted the technical and real, immedi¬ 
ately material counterpart of that chimerical granting of the right to 
punish. 



Prison 


4. With this new economy of power, the carceral system, which 
is its basic instrument, permitted the emergence of a new form of 
‘law’; a mixture of legality and nature, prescription and constitution, 
the norm. This had a whole series of effects: the internal dislocation 
of the judicial power or at least of its functioning; an increasing 
difficulty in judging, as if one were ashamed to pass sentence; a 
furious desire on the part of the judges to judge, assess, diagnose, 
recognize the normal and abnormal and claim the honour of curing 
or rehabilitating. In view of this, it is useless to believe in the good 
or bad consciences of judges, or even of their unconscious. Their 
immense ‘appetite for medicine’ which is constantly manifested - 
from their appeal to psychiatric experts, to their attention to the 
chatter of criminology - expresses the major fact that the power 
they exercise has been ‘denatured’; that it is at a certain level governed 
by laws; that at another, more fundamental level it functions as a 
normative power; it is the economy of power that they exercise, 
and not that of their scruples or their humanism, that makes them 
pass ‘therapeutic’ sentences and recommend ‘rehabilitating’ periods 
of imprisonment. But, conversely, if the judges accept ever more 
reluctantly to condemn for the sake of condemning, the activity of 
judging has increased precisely to the extent that the normalizing 
power has spread. Borne along by the omnipresence of the mechan¬ 
isms of discipline, basing itself on all the carceral apparatuses, it has 
