Beneath the increasing leniency of punishment, then, one may 
map a displacement of its point of application; and through this 


22 




The body of the condemned 


displacement, a whole field of recent objects, a whole new system of 
truth and a mass of roles hitherto unknown in the exercise of criminal 
justice. A corpus of knowledge, techniques, ‘scientific’ discourses is 
formed and becomes entangled with the practice of the power to 
punish. 

This book is intended as a correlative history of the modern soul 
and of a new power to judge; a genealogy of the present scientifico- 
legal complex from which the power to punish derives its bases, 
justifications and rules, from which it extends its effects and by which 
it masks its exorbitant singularity. 

But from what point can such a history of the modem soul on 
trial be written.^ If one confined oneself to the evolution of legisla¬ 
tion or of penal procedures, one would run the risk of allowing a 
change in the collective sensibility, an increase in humanization or 
the development of the human sciences to emerge as a massive, 
external, inert and primary fact. By studying only the general social 
forms, as Durkheim did (cf. Bibliography), one runs the risk of 
positing as the principle of greater leniency in punishment pro¬ 
cesses of individualization that are rather one of the effects of the 
new tactics of power, among which are to be included the new penal 
mechanisms. This study obeys four general rules: 

1. Do not concentrate the study of the punitive mechanisms on 
their ‘repressive’ effects alone, on their ‘punishment’ aspects alone, 
but situate them in a whole series of their possible positive effects, 
even if these seem marginal at first sight. As a consequence, regard 
punishment as a complex social function. 

2. Analyse punitive methods not simply as consequences of 
legislation or as indicators of social structures, but as techniques 
possessing their own specificity in the more general field of other 
ways of exercising power. Regard punishment as a political tactic. 

3. Instead of treating the history of penal law and the history of 
the human sciences as two separate series whose overlapping appears 
to have had on one or the other, or perhaps on both, a disturbing 
or useful effect, according to one’s point of view, see whether there 
is not some common matrix or whether they do not both derive 
from a single process of ‘epistemologico-juridical’ formation; in 
short, make the technology of power the very principle both of the 
humanization of the penal system and Of the knowledge of man. 


23 




Torture 


4. Try to discover whether this entry of the soul on to the scene 
of penal justice, and with it the insertion in legal practice of a whole 
corpus of ‘scientific’ knowledge, is not the effect of a transformation 
of the way in which the body itself is invested by power relations. 

In short, try to study the metamorphosis of punitive methods on 
the basis of a political technology of the body in which might be 
read a common history of power relations and object relations. 
Thus, by an analysis of penal leniency as a technique of power, 
one might understand both how man, the soul, the normal or 
abnormal individual have come to duplicate crime as objects of 
penal intervention; and in what way a specific mode of subjection 
was able to give birth to man as an object of knowledge for a dis¬ 
course with a ‘scientific’ status. 

But I am not claiming to be the first to have worked in this 
direction.^ 

Rusche and Kirchheimer’s great work. Punishment and Social 
Structures, provides a number of essential reference points. We must 
first rid ourselves of the illusion that penality is above all (if not 
exclusively) a means of reducing crime and that, in this role, accord¬ 
ing to the social forms, the political systems or beliefs, it may be 
severe or lenient, tend towards expiation of obtaining redress, to¬ 
wards the pursuit of individuals or the attribution of collective 
responsibility. We must analyse rather the ‘concrete systems of 
punishment’, study them as social phenomena that cannot be 
accounted for by the juridical structure of society alone, nor by its 
fundamental ethical choices; we must situate them in their field of 
operation, in which the punishment of crime is not the sole element; 
we must show that punitive measures are not simply ‘negative’ 
mechanisms that make it possible to repress, to prevent, to exclude, 
to eliminate; but that they are linked to a whole series of positive 
and useful effects which it is their task to support (and, in this sense, 
although legal punishment is carried out in order to punish offences, 
