minor criminals - as a tendency towards a more finely tuned justice, 
towards a closer penal mapping of the social body. Following a 
circular process, the threshold of the passage to violent crimes rises, 
intolerance to economic offences increases, controls become more 
thorough, penal interventions at once more premature and more 
numerous. 

If one compares this process with the critical discourse of the 
reformers, a remarkable strategic coincidence emerges. What they 
were attacking in traditional justice, before they set out the prin¬ 
ciples of a new penality, was certainly the excessive nature of the 
punishments; but an excess that was bound up with an irregularity 
even more than with an abuse of the power to punish. On 24 March 
1790, Thouret opened the debate in the Constituent Assembly on 
the new organization of the judicial power. In his view, this power 
had become ‘denatured’ in France in three ways. By private appro¬ 
priation: the offices of judge were sold; they were hereditary; they 
had a commercial value and, for that reason, the justice that was 
handed out was onerous. By a confusion between two types of 
power: that which dispenses justice and formulates a sentence by 
applying the law and that which creates the law itself. Lastly, by the 
existence of a whole series of privileges that made the implementa¬ 
tion of the law inconsistent: there were courts, procedures, litigants, 
even offences that were ‘privileged’ and fell outside common law 
{Archives parlementaires, XII, 344). This was only one of the many 
criticisms that had been levied at the legal system for the past fifty 
years at least, all of which denounced in this denaturation the 
principle of an irregular justice. Penal justice was irregular first of 
all by virtue of the multiplicity of courts responsible for assuring it, 
without ever forming a single and continuous pyramid (cf. Linguet 
or Boucher d’Argis, 1789). Quite apart from the ecclesiastical juris¬ 
dictions, we must take into account the discontinuities, overlappings 
and conflicts between the different legal systems: those of the 
nobility, which still played an important role in judging petty 
offences; those of the king, which were themselves numerous and 
badly coordinated (the sovereign courts were often in conflict with 


78 



Generalized punishment 


the bailiffs’ courts and above all with the presidial courts, which had 
recently been created as intermediary instances); those which, de jure 
or de facto, were administered by governmental authorities (such as 
the intendants, or provincial administrators) or police authorities 
(such as the provosts and police magistrates); to these should also 
be added the right possessed by the king or his representatives to 
take decisions on internment or exile quite outside any regular 
procedure. By their very plethora these innumerable authorities 
cancelled each other out and were incapable of covering the social 
body in its entirety. Paradoxically, their overlapping left penal 
justice with innumerable loopholes. This incompleteness was a result 
of differences of custom and procedure, despite the Ordonnance 
Generale of 1670; of internal conflicts of responsibility; of private 
interests - political or economic - which each authority found itself 
defending; and, lastly, of the interventions of the royal power, which 
could prevent, by means of pardons, commuted sentences, the evo¬ 
cation of a case before the royal council or direct pressure exerted 
on magistrates, the regular, austere course of justice. 

The criticism of the reformers was directed not so much at the 
weakness or cruelty of those in authority, as at a bad economy of 
power. There was too much power in the lower jurisdictions, which 
could — aided by the ignorance and poverty of those convicted - 
ignore appeal procedure and carry out arbitrary sentences without 
adequate supervision; there was too much power on the side of the 
prosecution, which possessed almost unlimited means of pursuing 
its investigations, while the accused opposed it virtually unarmed - 
this led judges to be sometimes over-severe and sometimes, by way 
of reaction, too lenient; there was too much power in the hands of 
the judges who were able to content themselves with futile evidence, 
providing it was ‘legal’ evidence, and who were allowed too great 
a freedom in the choice of penalty; there was too much power in 
the hands of the ‘gens du roi\ or royal magistrates, in relation to the 
accused, but also in relation to other magistrates; lastly, there was 
too much power exercised by the king, who could suspend courts 
of justice, alter their decisions, remove magistrates from office, or 
exile them, and replace them by judges acting under royal com¬ 
mission. The paralysis of justice was due not so much to a weakening 
as to a badly regulated distribution of power, to its concentration 


79 




Punishment 


at a certain number of points and to the conflicts and discontinuities 
that resulted. 

This dysfunction of power was related to a central excess: what 
might be called the monarchical ‘super-power’, which identified the 
right to punish with the personal power of the sovereign. This 
