convict-ship is an open-air prison. Detention, reclusion, imprison¬ 
ment for a minor offence are in a sense merely different names for 
one and the same punishment’ (Remusat, 185). And the Empire 
decided at once to translate this imprisonment, envisaged by the 
law, into reality, according to a whole penal, administrative, geo¬ 
graphical hierarchy; at the lowest degree, associated with each 
justice of the peace, municipal maisons de police-, in each arrondisse- 
ment, maisons d’arriv, in each departement, a maison de correction-, 
at the summit, several maisons centrales for convicted criminals or 
correctionels serving sentences of over one year; lastly, in a few ports, 
convict-ships. A great prison structure was planned, whose different 
levels would correspond exactly to the levels of the centralized 
administration. The scaffold, where the body of the tortured 
criminal had been exposed to the ritually manifested force of the 
sovereign, the punitive theatre in which the representation of 
punishment was permanently available to the social body, was 
replaced by a great enclosed, complex and hierarchized structure 


”5 




Punishment 


that was integrated into the very body of the state apparatus. A 
quite different materiality, a quite different physics of power, a quite 
different way of investing men’s bodies had emerged. During the 
Restoration and the July monarchy, there were, apart from a few 
exceptional moments, between 40,000 and 43,000 prisoners in 
French gaols (approximately one prisoner per 600 inhabitants). 
The high wall, no longer the wall that surrounds and protects, no 
longer the wall that stands for power and wealth, but the meticu¬ 
lously sealed wall, uncrossable in either direction, closed in upon the 
now mysterious work of punishment, will become, near at hand, 
sometimes even at the very centre of the cities of the nineteenth 
century, the monotonous figure, at onc^ material and symbolic, of 
the power to punish. Already under the Consulate, the Minister of 
the Interior had been appointed to investigate the different ‘places 
of safety’ that were already functioning and which could be used in 
different towns. A few years later, sums had been allocated for the 
construction, in keeping with the power that they were to represent 
and serve, of these new castles of the new civil order. The empire 
used them in fact, for another war (cf. Decazes), A less extravagant, 
but more obstinate economy continued to build them throughout 
the nineteenth century. 

In under twenty years, in any case, the principle so clearly 
formulated in the Constituent Assembly, of specific, appropriate, 
effective penalties, constituting, in each case, a lesson for all, became 
the law of detention for every offence of any importance, except 
those requiring the death penalty. The theatre of punishment of 
which the eighteenth century dreamed and which would have acted 
essentially on the minds of the general public was replaced by the 
great uniform machinery of the prisons, whose network of immense 
buildings was to extend across France and Europe. But twenty years 
is perhaps too long a chronology for this conjuring trick. It may 
be argued that it occurred almost instantaneously. One has only to 
look at the bill for the criminal code presented in the Constituent 
Assembly by Le Peletier. The principle stated at the outset is the 
need for ‘exact relations between the nature of the offence and the 
nature of the punishment’: physical pain should be inflicted on those 
who commit crimes of violence, hard labour on the idle, shame on 
those with degraded souls. But the severe penalties actually 




The gentle way in punishment 


proposed are three forms of detention: the 'cachot', in which the 
penalty of imprisonment is augmented by various measures (solitude, 
a deprivation of light, restrictions on food); the'^ene’, in which these 
ancillary measures are attenuated, and lastly imprisonment proper, 
which is reduced to simple confinement. The diversity, so solemnly 
promised, is reduced in the end to this grey, uniform penalty. 
Indeed, at the time, there were deputies who expressed surprise that, 
instead of establishing a natural relation between offences and 
penalties, a quite different plan had been adopted: ‘So that if I have 
betrayed my country, I go to prison; if I have killed my father, I go 
to prison; every imaginable offence is punished in the same uniform 
way. One might as well see a physician who has the same remedy 
for all ills’ (Chabroud, 6i8). 

This prompt substitution was not confined to France. It was to be 
found, to a greater or lesser degree, in other countries. When 
Catherine II, in the years immediately following the treatise Des 
dilits et des peines, gave instructions to the commission entrusted 
with the task of drawing up a ‘new code of laws’, Beccaria’s lesson 
on the specificity and variety of penalties was not forgotten; it was 
repeated almost word for word: ‘It is a triumph of civil liberty when 
the criminal laws derive each penalty from the particular nature of 
each crime. In this way all arbitrariness ceases; the penalty does not 
depend on the caprice of the legislator, but on the nature of the 
thing; it is not man who does violence to man, but the man’s own 
action’ (article 67). A few years later, Beccaria’s general principle 
served as a foundation for the new Tuscan Code and for the new 
