expressed: resistance to police searches, the pursuit of informers, 
attacks on the watch or inspectors provide abundant evidence of 
this (cf. Richet, 118-19). ^^id it was the breaking up of this solidar¬ 
ity that was becoming the aim of penal and police repression. Yet 
out of the ceremony of the public execution, out of that uncertain 
festival in which violence was instantaneously reversible, it was this 
solidarity much more than the sovereign power that was likely to 
emerge with redoubled strength. The reformers of the eighteenth 
and nineteenth centuries were not to forget that, in the last resort, 
the executions did not, in fact, frighten the people. One of their 
first cries was to demand their abolition. 

To clarify the political problem posed by the intervention of the 
people in the spectacle of the executions, one need only cite two 
events. The first took place at Avignon at the end of the seventeenth 
century. It contained all the principal elements of the theatre of 
horror: the physical confrontation between the executioner and the 
condemned man, the reversal of the duel, the executioner pursued 


<53 




Torture 


by the people, the condemned man saved by the ensuing riot and 
the violent inversion of the penal machinery. A murderer by the 
name of Pierre du Fort was to be hanged; several times he ‘had 
caught his feet in the steps’ and had not been able to swing freely. 
‘Seeing this, the executioner had pulled his jerkin up over his face 
and struck him below the knees, on the stomach and on the belly. 
When the people saw that the executioner was causing him too 
much pain, and even believing that he was killing him down there 
with a bayonet... moved by compassion for the patient and fury 
at the executioner, they threw stones at the scaffold just as the 
executioner knocked away the two ladders and threw the patient 
down and leaped on to his shoulders and kicked him, while the wife 
of the said executioner pulled at his feet from under the gallows. 
In doing so, they made blood come from his mouth. But the hail 
of stones came thicker - one stone even struck the hanged man on 
the head - which forced the executioner to dash to the ladder, which 
he descended so rapidly that half-way down he fell from it, and 
struck his head on the ground. Then a crowd of people fell upon 
him. He got to his feet, bayonet in hand, threatening to kill anyone 
who came near him; after falling several times, he finally got to his 
feet, only to be beaten by the crowd, rolled in the mud and nearly 
drowned in the stream, then dragged by the excited and enraged 
