

is hastened by pain; with more rigour, because it occurs exactly at 
the juncture between the judgement of men and the judgement of 
God; with more ostentation, because it takes place in public. The 
sufferings of the condemned man are an extension of those of the 
judicial torture that precedes them; in the judicial torture, however, 
the game was not yet over and one could still save one’s life; now 
one will die, without any doubt, and it is one’s soul that one must 
save. The eternal game has already begun: the torture of the execu¬ 
tion anticipates the punishments of the beyond; it shows what they 
are; it is the theatre of hell; the cries of the condemned man, his 
struggles, his blasphemies, already signify his irremediable destiny. 
But the pains here below may also be counted as penitence and so 
alleviate the punishments of the beyond: God will not fail to take 
such a martyrdom into account, providing it is borne with resigna¬ 
tion. The cruelty of the earthly punishment will be deducted from 
the punishment to come: in it is glimpsed the promise of forgive¬ 
ness. But, it might be said, are not such terrible sufferings a sign 
that God has abandoned the guilty man to the mercy of his fellow 
creatures.^ And, far from securing future absolution, do they not 
prefigure imminent damnation; so that, if the condemned man dies 
quickly, without a prolonged agony, is it not proof that God wishes 
to protect him and to prevent him from falling into despairi* There 
is, therefore, an ambiguity in this suffering that may signify equally 
well the truth of the crime or the error of the judges, the goodness 
or the evil of the criminal, the coincidence or the divergence between 
the judgement of men and that of God. Hence the insatiable curiosity 
that drove the spectators to the scaffold to witness the spectacle of 
sufferings truly endured; there one could decipher crime and inno¬ 
cence, the past and the future, the here below and the eternal. It was 
a moment of truth that all the spectators questioned: each word, each 
cry, the duration of the agony, the resisting body, the life that clung 
desperately to it, all this constituted a sign. There was the man who 
survived ‘six hours on the wheel, and did not want the executioner, 
who consoled and heartened him no doubt as best he could, to leave 
him for a moment’; there was the man who died ‘with true Christian 
feeling, and who manifested the most sincere repentance’; the man 
who ‘expired on the wheel an hour after being put there; it is said 
that the spectators of his torture were moved by the outward signs 


46 




The spectacle of the scaffold 


of religion and repentance that he gave’; the man who had shown 
the most marked signs of contrition throughout the journey to the 
scaffold, but who, when placed alive on the wheel, ‘did not cease 
to let forth the most horrible cries’; or again the woman who ‘had 
preserved her calm up to the moment when the sentence was read, 
but whose wits then began to turn; she was quite mad by the time 
she was hanged’ (Hardy, I, 13; IV, 42; V, 134). 

We have come full circle: from the judicial torture to the execu¬ 
tion, the body has produced and reproduced the truth of the crime 
-or rather it constitutes the element which, through a whole set of 
rituals and trials, confesses that the crime took place, admits that the 
accused did indeed commit it, shows that he bore it inscribed in 
himself and on himself, supports the operation of punishment and 
manifests its effects in the most striking way. The body, several 
times tortured, provides the synthesis of the reality of the deeds and 
the truth of the investigation, of the documents of the case and the 
statements of the criminal, of the crime and the punishment. It is an 
essential element, therefore, in a penal liturgy, in which it must 
serve as the partner of a procedure ordered around the formidable 
rights of the sovereign, the prosecution and secrecy. 

The public execution is to be understood not only as a judicial, 
but also as a political ritual. It belongs, even in minor cases, to the 
ceremonies by which power is manifested. 

An offence, according to the law of the classical age, quite apart 
from the damage it may produce, apart even from the rule that it 
breaks, offends the rectitude of those who abide by the law: ‘If one 
commits something that the law forbids, even if there is neither harm 
nor injury to the individual, it is an offence that demands reparation, 
because the right of the superior man is violated and because it 
offends the dignity of his character’ (Risi, 9). Besides its immediate 
victim, the crime attacks the sovereign: it attacks him personally, 
since the law represents the will of the sovereign; it attacks him 
physically, since the force of the law is the force of the prince. 
‘For a law to be in force in this kingdom, it must necessarily have 
emanated directly from the sovereign, or at least been confirmed by 
the seal of his authority’ (Muyart de Vouglans, xxxiv). The inter¬ 
vention of the sovereign is not, therefore, an arbitration between 


47 



Torture 


two adversaries; it is much more, even, than an action to enforce 
