material and physical presence, with the force that he himself deploys 
or transmits to some few others, is at the opposite extreme of this 
new physics of power represented by panopticism; the domain of 
panopticism is, on the contrary, that whole lower region, that region 
of irregular bodies, with their details, their multiple movements, 
their heterogeneous forces, their spatial relations; what are required 
are mechanisms that analyse distributions, gaps, series, combina¬ 
tions, and which use instruments that render visible, record, 
differentiate and compare: a physics of a relational and multiple 
power, which has its maximum intensity not in the person of the 
king, but in the bodies that can be individualized by these relations. 
At the theoretical level, Bentham defines another way of analysing 
the social body and the power relations that traverse it; in terms of 
practice, he defines a procedure of subordination of bodies and forces 
that must increase the utility of power while practising the economy 
of the prince. Panopticism is the general principle of a new ‘political 
anatomy’ whose object and end are not the relations of sovereignty 
but the relations of discipline. 

The celebrated, transparent, circular cage, with its high tower, 
powerful and knowing, may have been for Bentham a project of a 
perfect disciplinary institution; but he also set out to show how one 
may ‘unlock’ the disciplines and get them to function in a diffused. 


208 



Panopticism 


multiple, polyvalent way throughout the whole social body. These 
disciplines, which the classical age had elaborated in specific, 
relatively enclosed places - barracks, schools, workshops - and 
whose total implementation had been imagined only at the limited 
and temporary scale of a plague-stricken town, Bentham dreamt of 
transforming into a network of mechanisms that would be every¬ 
where and always alert, running through society without interrup¬ 
tion in space or in time. The panoptic arrangement provides the 
formula for this generalization. It programmes, at the level of an 
elementary and easily transferable mechanism, the basic functioning 
of a society penetrated through and through with disciplinary 
mechanisms. 

There are two images, then, of discipline. At one extreme, the 
discipline-blockade, the enclosed institution, established on the 
edges of society, turned inwards towards negative functions: 
arresting evil, breaking communications, suspending time. At the 
other extreme, with panopticism, is the discipline-mechanism: a 
functional mechanism that must improve the exercise of power by 
making it lighter, more rapid, more effective, a design of subtle 
coercion for a society to come. The movement from one project 
to the other, from a schema of exceptional discipline to one of 
a generalized surveillance, rests on a historical transformation: 
the gradual extension of the mechanisms of discipline throughout 
the seventeenth and eighteenth cenmries, their spread throughout the 
whole social body, the formation of what might be called in general 
the disciplinary society. 

A whole disciplinary generalization - the Benthamite physics of 
power represents an acknowledgement of this - had operated 
throughout the classical age. The spread of disciplinary instimtions, 
whose network was beginning to cover an ever larger surface and 
occupying above all a less and less marginal position, testifies to 
this: what was an islet, a privileged place, a circumstantial measure, 
or a singular model, became a general formula; the regulations 
characteristic of the Protestant and pious armies of William of 
Orange or of Gustavus Adolphus were transformed into regulations 
for all the armies of Europe; the model colleges of the Jesuits, or the 
schools of Batencour or Demia, following the exatnple set by Smrm, 


209 



Discipline 


provided the outlines for the general forms of educational dis¬ 
cipline; the ordering of the naval and military hospitals provided 
the model for the entire reorganization of hospitals in the eighteenth 
century. 

But this extension of the disciplinary institutions was no doubt 
only the most visible aspect of various, more profound processes. 

I. The functional inversion of the disciplines. At first, they were 
expected to neutralize dangers, to fix useless or disturbed popula¬ 
tions, to avoid the inconveniences of over-large assemblies; now 
they were being asked to play a positive role, for they were becom¬ 
ing able to do so, to increase the possible utility of individuals. 
Military discipline is no longer a mere means of preventing looting, 
desertion or failure to obey orders among the troops; it has become 
a basic technique to enable the army to exist, not as an assembled 
crowd, but as a unity that derives from this very unity an increase 
in its forces; discipline increases the skill of each individual, co¬ 
ordinates these skills, accelerates movements, increases fire power, 
broadens the fronts of attack without reducing their vigour, in¬ 
