platform "Peace Without Victory." That was 
right in the middle of the World War I. The pop- 
ulation was extremely pacifistic and saw no rea- 
son to become involved in a European war. The 
Wilson administration was actually committed 
to war and had to do something about it. They 
established a government propaganda com- 
mission, called the Creel Commission which 
succeeded, within six months, in turning a 
pacifist population into a hysterical, war-mon- 
gering population which wanted to destroy 
everything German, tear the Germans limb 
from limb, go to war and save the world. That 
was a major achievement, and it led to a further 
achievement. Right at that time and after the 
war the same techniques were used to whip up 
a hysterical Red Scare, as it was called, which 
succeeded pretty much in destroying unions 
and eliminating such dangerous problems as 
freedom of the press and freedom of political 



thought. There was very strong support from 
the media, from the business establishment, 
which in fact organized, pushed much of this 
work, and it was, in general, a great success. 

Among those who participated actively and 
enthusiastically in Wilson's war were the pro- 
gressive intellectuals, people of the John 
Dewey circle, who took great pride, as you can 
see from their own writings at the time, in hav- 
ing shown that what they called the "more 
intelligent members of the community," 
namely, themselves, were able to drive a 
reluctant population into a war by terrifying 
them and eliciting jingoist fanaticism. The 
means that were used were extensive. For 
example, there was a good deal of fabrication 
of atrocities by the Huns, Belgian babies with 
their arms torn off, all sorts of awful things that 
you still read in history books. Much of it was 
invented by the British propaganda ministry, 
whose own commitment at the time, as they 
put it in their secret deliberations, was "to 
direct the thought of most of the world." But 
more crucially they wanted to control the 
thought of the more intelligent members of the 
community in the United States, who would 
