vador, Guatemala, Indonesia, Damascus, Tel 
Aviv, Capetown, Turkey, Washington, and a 
whole list of other states. These are all cases 
of illegal occupation and aggression and severe 
human rights abuses. If you know the facts 
about that range of examples, you'll know very 



well that Saddam Hussein's aggression and 
atrocities fall well within the range. They're 
not the most extreme. Why doesn't anybody 
come to that conclusion? The reason is that 
nobody knows. In a well-functioning propa- 
ganda system, nobody would know what I'm 
talking about when I list that range of exam- 
ples. If you bother to look, you find that those 
examples are quite appropriate. 

Take one that was ominously close to being 
perceived during the Gulf War. In February, 
right in the middle of the bombing campaign, 
the government of Lebanon requested Israel to 
observe U.N. Security Council Resolution 
425, which called on it to withdraw immedi- 
ately and unconditionally from Lebanon. That 
resolution dates from March 1978. There have 
since been two subsequent resolutions calling 
for the immediate and unconditional with- 
drawal of Israel from Lebanon. Of course it 
doesn't observe them because the United 
States backs it in maintaining that occupation. 
Meanwhile southern Lebanon is terrorized. 
There are big torture-chambers with horrifying 
things going on. It's used as a base for attack- 
ing other parts of Lebanon. Since 1978, 
Lebanon was invaded, the city of Beirut was 
bombed, about 20,000 people were killed, about 



80 percent of them civilians, hospitals were 
destroyed, and more terror, looting, and robbery 
was inflicted. All fine, the United States 
backed it. That's just one case. You didn't see 
anything in the media about it or any discus- 
sion about whether Israel and the United States 
should observe U.N. Security Council Resolu- 
tion 425 or any of the other resolutions, nor did 
anyone call for the bombing of Tel Aviv, 
although by the principles upheld by two-thirds 
of the population, we should. After all, that's 
illegal occupation and severe human rights 
abuses. That's just one case. There are much 
worse ones. The Indonesian invasion of East 
Timor knocked off about 200,000 people. They 
all look minor by that one. That was strongly 
backed by the United States and is still going 
on with major United States diplomatic and 
military support. We can go on and on. 



THE GULF WAR 



That tells you how a well-functioning propa- 
ganda system works. People can believe that 
when we use force against Iraq and Kuwait it's 
because we really observe the principle that 
illegal occupation and human rights abuses 
should be met by force. They don't see what it 
would mean if those principles were applied to 
U.S. behavior. That's a success of propaganda 
of quite a spectacular type. 

Let's take a look at another case. If you look 
closely at the coverage of the war since August 
(1990), you'll notice that there are a couple of 
striking voices missing. For example, there is 
an Iraqi democratic opposition, in fact, a very 
courageous and quite substantial Iraqi democ- 
ratic opposition. They, of course, function in 
exile because they couldn't survive in Iraq. 
They are in Europe primarily. They are 
bankers, engineers, architects — people like 
that. They are articulate, they have voices, and 
they speak. The previous February, when Sad- 
dam Hussein was still George Bush's favorite 
friend and trading partner, they actually came 
to Washington, according to Iraqi democratic 
opposition sources, with a plea for some kind 



of support for a demand of theirs calling for a 
parliamentary democracy in Iraq. They were 
totally rebuffed, because the United States had 
no interest in it. There was no reaction to this 
