general public." This is a view that goes back 
hundreds of years. It's also a typical Leninist 
view. In fact, it has very close resemblance to 
the Leninist conception that a vanguard of rev- 
olutionary intellectuals take state power, 
using popular revolutions as the force that 
brings them to state power, and then drive the 
stupid masses toward a future that they're too 
dumb and incompetent to envision for them- 
selves. The liberal democratic theory and 
Marxism-Leninism are very close in their 
common ideological assumptions. I think 
that's one reason why people have found it so 
easy over the years to drift from one position 
to another without any particular sense of 
change. It's just a matter of assessing where 
power is. Maybe there will be a popular revo- 
lution, and that will put us into state power; 
or maybe there won't be, in which case we'll 
just work for the people with real power: the 
business community. But we'll do the same 
thing. We'll drive the stupid masses toward a 
world that they're too dumb to understand for 
themselves. 



Lippmann backed this up by a pretty elab- 
orated theory of progressive democracy. He 
argued that in a properly functioning democ- 
racy there are classes of citizens. There is first 
of all the class of citizens who have to take 
some active role in running general affairs. 
That's the specialized class. They are the peo- 
ple who analyze, execute, make decisions, and 
run things in the political, economic, and ide- 
ological systems. That's a small percentage of 
the population. Naturally, anyone who puts 
these ideas forth is always part of that small 
group, and they're talking about what to do 
about those others. Those others, who are out 
of the small group, the big majority of the pop- 
ulation, they are what Lippmann called "the 
bewildered herd. " We have to protect ourselves 
from "the trampling and roar of a bewildered 
herd". Now there are two "functions" in a 
democracy: The specialized class, the respon- 
sible men, carry out the executive function, 
which means they do the thinking and plan- 
ning and understand the common interests. 
