minor thug. Bad, but not a world-class thug of 
the kind we like. He was turned into a creature 
larger than life. He was going to destroy us, 
leading the narco-traffickers. We had to 
quickly move in and smash him, killing a cou- 
ple hundred or maybe thousand people, restor- 
ing to power the tiny, maybe eight percent 
white oligarchy, and putting U.S. military 
officers in control at every level of the politi- 
cal system. We had to do all those things 



because, after all, we had to save ourselves or 
we were going to be destroyed by this monster. 
One year later the same thing was done by Sad- 
dam Hussein. Did anybody point it out? Did 
anybody point out what had happened or why? 
You'll have to look pretty hard for that. 

Notice that this is not all that different 
from what the Creel Commission when it 
turned a pacifistic population into raving hys- 
terics who wanted to destroy everything Ger- 
man to save ourselves from Huns who were 
tearing the arms off Belgian babies. The tech- 
niques are maybe more sophisticated, with 
television and lots of money going into it, but 
it's pretty traditional. 

I think the issue, to come back to my orig- 
inal comment, is not simply disinformation 
and the Gulf crisis. The issue is much broader. 
It's whether we want to live in a free society 
or whether we want to live under what 
amounts to a form of self-imposed totalitari- 
anism, with the bewildered herd marginalized, 
directed elsewhere, terrified, screaming patri- 
otic slogans, fearing for their lives and admir- 
ing with awe the leader who saved them from 
destruction, while the educated masses goose- 
step on command and repeat the slogans 
they're supposed to repeat and the society dete- 



riorates at home. We end up serving as a mer- 
cenary enforcer state, hoping that others are 
going to pay us to smash up the world. Those 
are the choices. That's the choice that you have 
to face. The answer to those questions is very 
much in the hands of people like you and me. 



