ture as a mechanism of social control" in "the 
hell that was the Cuba that [Valladares] lived 
in." That's the Washington Post and New York 
Times in repeated reviews. Castro was 
described as "a dictatorial goon." His atrocities 
were revealed in this book so conclusively that 
"only the most light-headed and cold-blooded 
Western intellectual will come to the tyrant's 
defense," said the Washington Post. Remem- 
ber, this is the account of what happened to one 
man. Let's say it's all true. Let's raise no ques- 



tions about what happened to the one man who 
says he was tortured. At a White House cere- 
mony marking Human Rights Day, he was sin- 
gled out by Ronald Reagan for his courage in 
enduring the horrors and sadism of this bloody 
Cuban tyrant. He was then appointed the U.S. 
representative at the U.N. Human Rights 
Commission, where he has been able to per- 
form signal services defending the Salvadoran 
and Guatemalan governments against charges 
that they conduct atrocities so massive that 
they make anything he suffered look pretty 
minor. That's the way things stand. 

That was May 1986. It was interesting, and 
it tells you something about the manufacture 
of consent. The same month, the surviving 
members of the Human Rights Group of El Sal- 
vador — the leaders had been killed — were 
arrested and tortured, including Herbert Anaya, 
who was the director. They were sent to a 
prison — LaEsperanza (hope) Prison. While they 
were in prison they continued their human 
rights work. They were lawyers, they continued 
taking affidavits. There were 432 prisoners in 
that prison. They got signed affidavits from 430 
of them in which they described, under oath, 
the torture that they had received: electrical tor- 
ture and other atrocities, including, in one case, 



torture by a North American U.S. major in uni- 
form, who is described in some detail. This is 
an unusually explicit and comprehensive tes- 
timony, probably unique in its detail about 
what's going on in a torture chamber. This 
160-page report of the prisoners' sworn testi- 
mony was sneaked out of prison, along with a 
videotape which was taken showing people tes- 
tifying in prison about their torture. It was dis- 
tributed by the Marin County Interfaith Task 
Force. The national press refused to cover it. 
The TV stations refused to run it. There was an 
article in the local Marin County newspaper, 
the San Francisco Examiner, and I think that's 
all. No one else would touch it. This was a time 
when there was more than a few "light-headed 
and cold-blooded Western intellectuals" who 
were singing the praises of Jose Napoleon 
Duarte and of Ronald Reagan. Anaya was not 
the subject of any tributes. He didn't get on 
Human Rights Day. He wasn't appointed to 
anything. He was released in a prisoner 
exchange and then assassinated, apparently by 
the U.S. -backed security forces. Very little infor- 
mation about that ever appeared. The media 
never asked whether exposure of the atroci- 
ties — instead of sitting on them and silencing 
them — might have saved his life. 



This tells you something about the way a 
well-functioning system of consent manufac- 
turing works. In comparison with the revela- 
tions of Herbert Anaya in El Salvador, 
Valladares's memoirs are not even a pea next 
to the mountain. But you've got your job to do. 
That takes us toward the next war. I expect, 
we're going to hear more and more of this, until 
the next operation takes place. 

A few remarks about the last one. Let's 
turn finally to that. Let me begin with this Uni- 
versity of Massachusetts study that I men- 
tioned before. It has some interesting 
conclusions. In the study people were asked 
whether they thought that the United States 
should intervene with force to reverse illegal 
occupation or serious human rights abuses. By 
about two to one, people in the United States 
thought we should. We should use force in the 
case of illegal occupation of land and severe 
human rights abuses. If the United States was 
to follow that advice, we would bomb El Sal- 
