There was a name for that. It was called by the 
specialized class "the crisis of democracy." 
Democracy was regarded as entering into a cri- 
sis in the 1960s. The crisis was that large seg- 
ments of the population were becoming 
organized and active and trying to participate 
in the political arena. Here we come back to 
these two conceptions of democracy. By the 
dictionary definition, that's an advance in 
democracy. By the prevailing conception that's 
a problem, a crisis that has to be overcome. The 



population has to be driven back to the apathy, 
obedience and passivity that is their proper 
■state. We therefore have to do something to 
overcome the crisis. Efforts were made to 
achieve that. It hasn't worked. The crisis of 
democracy is still alive and well, fortunately, 
but not very effective in changing policy. But 
it is effective in changing opinion, contrary to 
what a lot of people believe. Great efforts were 
made after the 1960s to try to reverse and over- 
come this malady. One aspect of the malady 
actually got a technical name. It was called the 
"Vietnam Syndrome." The Vietnam Syn- 
drome, a term that began to come up around 
1970, has actually been defined on occasion. 
The Reaganite intellectual Norman Podhoretz 
defined it as "the sickly inhibitions against the 
use of military force." There were these sickly 
inhibitions against violence on the part of a 
large part of the public. People just didn't 
understand why we should go around torturing 
people and killing people and carpet bombing 
them. It's very dangerous for a population to be 
overcome by these sickly inhibitions, as 
Goebbels understood, because then there's a 
limit on foreign adventures. It's necessary, as 
the Washington Post put it rather proudly dur- 
ing the Gulf War hysteria, to instill in people 



respect for "martial value." That's important. 
If you want to have a violent society that uses 
force around the world to achieve the ends of 
its own domestic elite, it's necessary to have 
a proper appreciation of the martial virtues and 
