then disseminate the propaganda that they 
were concocting and convert the pacifistic 



country to wartime hysteria. That worked. It 
worked very well. And it taught a lesson: State 
propaganda, when supported by the educated 
classes and when no deviation is permitted 
from it, can have a big effect. It was a lesson 
learned by Hitler and many others, and it has 
been pursued to this day. 



SPECTATOR DEMOCRACY 



Another group that was impressed by these 
successes was liberal democratic theorists and 
leading media figures, like, for example, Wal- 
ter Lippmann, who was the dean of American 
journalists, a major foreign and domestic pol- 
icy critic and also a major theorist of liberal 
democracy. If you take a look at his collected 
essays, you'll see that they're subtitled some- 
thing like "A Progressive Theory of Liberal 
Democratic Thought." Lippmann was 
involved in these propaganda commissions and 
recognized their achievements. He argued that 
what he called a "revolution in the art of 
democracy," could be used to "manufacture 
consent, " that is, to bring about agreement on 
the part of the public for things that they did- 
n't want by the new techniques of propaganda. 
He also thought that this was a good idea, in 
fact, necessary. It was necessary because, as he 
put it, "the common interests elude public 
opinion entirely" and can only be understood 
and managed by a "specialized class "of 
"responsible men" who are smart enough to 
figure things out. This theory asserts that only 



a small elite, the intellectual community that 
the Deweyites were talking about, can under- 
stand the common interests, what all of us 
care about, and that these things "elude the 
general public." This is a view that goes back 
hundreds of years. It's also a typical Leninist 
view. In fact, it has very close resemblance to 
the Leninist conception that a vanguard of rev- 
olutionary intellectuals take state power, 
using popular revolutions as the force that 
brings them to state power, and then drive the 
stupid masses toward a future that they're too 
dumb and incompetent to envision for them- 
selves. The liberal democratic theory and 
Marxism-Leninism are very close in their 
common ideological assumptions. I think 
that's one reason why people have found it so 
easy over the years to drift from one position 
to another without any particular sense of 
change. It's just a matter of assessing where 
power is. Maybe there will be a popular revo- 
lution, and that will put us into state power; 
or maybe there won't be, in which case we'll 
just work for the people with real power: the 
business community. But we'll do the same 
thing. We'll drive the stupid masses toward a 
world that they're too dumb to understand for 
themselves. 



Lippmann backed this up by a pretty elab- 
orated theory of progressive democracy. He 
argued that in a properly functioning democ- 
racy there are classes of citizens. There is first 
of all the class of citizens who have to take 
some active role in running general affairs. 
That's the specialized class. They are the peo- 
ple who analyze, execute, make decisions, and 
run things in the political, economic, and ide- 
ological systems. That's a small percentage of 
the population. Naturally, anyone who puts 
these ideas forth is always part of that small 
group, and they're talking about what to do 
about those others. Those others, who are out 
of the small group, the big majority of the pop- 
ulation, they are what Lippmann called "the 
bewildered herd. " We have to protect ourselves 
from "the trampling and roar of a bewildered 
herd". Now there are two "functions" in a 
democracy: The specialized class, the respon- 
sible men, carry out the executive function, 
which means they do the thinking and plan- 
ning and understand the common interests. 
