tions, jails, deterioration in the inner cities — 
the whole raft of problems. You all know about 
them, and they're all getting worse. Just in the 
two years that George Bush has been in office 
three million more children crossed the 
poverty line, the debt is zooming, educational 
standards are declining, real wages are now 
back to the level of about the late 1950s for 
much of the population, and nobody's doing 



anything about it. In such circumstances 
you've got to divert the bewildered herd, 
because if they start noticing this they may not 
like it, since they're the ones suffering from it. 
Just having them watch the Superbowl and the 
sitcoms may not be enough. You have to whip 
them up into fear of enemies. In the 1930s 
Hitler whipped them into fear of the Jews and 
gypsies. You had to crush them to defend your- 
selves. We have our ways, too. Over the last ten 
years, every year or two, some major monster 
is constructed that we have to defend ourselves 
against. There used to be one that was always 
readily available: The Russians. You could 
always defend yourself against the Russians. 
But they're losing their attractiveness as an 
enemy, and it's getting harder and harder to use 
that one, so some new ones have to be conjured 
up. In fact, people have quite unfairly criticized 
George Bush for being unable to express or 
articulate what's really driving us now. That's 
very unfair. Prior to about the mid-1980s, when 
you were asleep you would just play the record: 
the Russians are coming. But he lost that one 
and he's got to make up new ones, just like the 
Reaganite public relations apparatus did in the 
1980s. So it was international terrorists and 
narco-traffickers and crazed Arabs and Saddam 



Hussein, the new Hitler, was going to conquer 
the world. They've got to keep coming up one 
after another. You frighten the population, ter- 
rorize them, intimidate them so that they're 
too afraid to travel and cower in fear. Then you 
have a magnificent victory over Grenada, 
Panama, or some other defenseless third- 
world army that you can pulverize before you 
ever bother to look at them — which is just 
what happened. That gives relief. We were 
saved at the last minute. That's one of the ways 
in which you can keep the bewildered herd 
from paying attention to what's really going on 
around them, keep them diverted and con- 
trolled. The next one that's coming along, most 
likely, will be Cuba. That's going to require a 
continuation of the illegal economic warfare, 
possibly a revival of the extraordinary inter- 
national terrorism. The most major interna- 
tional terrorism organized yet has been the 
Kennedy administration's Operation Mon- 
goose, then the things that followed along, 
against Cuba. There's been nothing remotely 
comparable to it except perhaps the war 
against Nicaragua, if you call that terrorism. 
The World Court classified it as something 
more like aggression. There's always an ideo- 
logical offensive that builds up a chimerical 



monster, then campaigns to have it crushed. 
You can't go in if they can fight back. That's 
much too dangerous. But if you are sure that 
they will be crushed, maybe we'll knock that 
one off and heave another sigh of relief. 



SELECTIVE PERCEPTION 



This has been going on for quite a while. In 
May 1986, the memoirs of the released Cuban 
prisoner, Armando Valladares, came out. They 
quickly became a media sensation. I'll give you 
a couple of quotes. The media described his 
revelations as "the definitive account of the 
vast system of torture and prison by which Cas- 
tro punishes and obliterates political opposi- 
tion." It was "an inspiring and unforgettable 
account" of the "bestial prisons," inhuman tor- 
ture, [and] record of state violence [under] yet 
another of this century's mass murderers, who 
we learn, at last, from this book "has created 
a new despotism that has institutionalized tor- 
