There was a major strike, the Steel strike in 
western Pennsylvania at Johnstown. Business 
tried out a new technique oflabor destruction, 
which worked very well. Not through goon 
squads and breaking knees. That wasn't work- 
ing very well any more, but through the more 
subtle and effective means of propaganda. The 
idea was to figure out ways to turn the public 
against the strikers, to present the strikers as 
disruptive, harmful to the public and against 
the common interests. The common interests 
are those of "us," the businessman, the 
worker, the housewife. That's all "us." We 
want to be together and have things like har- 
mony and Americanism and working together. 
Then there's those bad strikers out there who 
are disruptive and causing trouble and break- 
ing harmony and violating Americanism. 
We've got to stop them so we can all live 
together. The corporate executive and the guy 
who cleans the floors all have the same inter- 
ests. We can all work together and work for 
Americanism in harmony, liking each other. 



That was essentially the message. A huge 
amount of effort was put into presenting it. 
This is, after all, the business community, so 
they control the media and have massive 
resources. And it wrked, very effectively. It 
was later called the "Mohawk Valley formula" 
and applied over and over again to break 
strikes. They were called "scientific methods 
of strike-breaking," and worked very effec- 
tively by mobilizing community opinion in 
favor of vapid, empty concepts like American- 
ism. Who can be against that? Or harmony. 
Who can be against that? Or, as in the Persian 
Gulf War, "Support our troops." Who can be 
against that? Or yellow ribbons. Who can be 
against that? Anything that's totally vacuous 
In fact, what does it mean if somebody 
asks you, Do you support the people in Iowa? 
Can you say, Yes, I support them, or No, I don't 
support them? It's not even a question. It does- 
n't mean anything. That's the point. The point 
of public relations slogans like "Support our 
troops" is that they don't mean anything. They 
mean as much as whether you support the peo- 
ple in Iowa. Of course, there was an issue. The 
issue was, Do you support our policy? But you 
don't want people to think about that issue. 
That's the whole point of good propaganda. 



You want to create a slogna that nobody's 
going to be against, and everybody's going to 
be for. Nobody knows what it means, because 
it doesn't mean anything. Its crucial value is 
that it diverts your attention from a question 
that does mean something: Do you support our 
policy? That's the one you're not allowed to 
talk about. So you have people arguing about 
support for the troops? "Of course I don't not 
support them." Then you've won. That's like 
Americanism and harmony. We're all 
together, empty slogans, let's join in, let's 
make sure we don't have these bad people 
around to disrupt our harmony with their talk 
about class struggle, rights and that sort of 
business. 

That's all very effective. It runs right up to 
today. And of course it is carefully thought out. 
The people in the public relations industry 
aren't there for the fun of it. They're doing 
work. They're trying to instill the right values. 
In fact, they have a conception of what democ- 
racy ought to be: It ought to be a system in 
which the specialized class is trained to work 
in the service of the masters, the people who 
own the society. The rest of the population 
ought to be deprived of any form of organiza- 
tion, because organization just causes trouble. 



They ought to be sitting alone in front of the 
TV and having drilled into their heads the mes- 
sage, which says, the only value in life is to 
have more commodities or live like that rich 
middle class family you're watching and to 
have nice values like harmony and American- 
ism. That's all there is in life. You may think 
in your own head that there's got to be some- 
thing more in life than this, but since you're 
watching the tube alone you assume, I must be 
crazy, because that's all that's going on over 
