there. And since there is no organization per- 
mitted — that's absolutely crucial — you never 
have a way of finding out whether you are 
crazy, and you just assume it, because it's the 
natural thing to assume. 

So that's the ideal. Great efforts are made 
in trying to achieve that ideal. Obviously, 
there is a certain conception behind it. The 
conception of democracy is the one that I men- 
tioned. The bewildered herd is a problem. 
We've got to prevent their roar and trampling . 
We've got to distract them. They should be 
watching the Superbowl or sitcoms or violent 
movies. Every once in a while you call on 
them to chant meaningless slogans like "Sup- 
port our troops." You've got to keep them 
pretty scared, because unless they're properly 



scared and frightened of all kinds of devils that 
are going to destroy them from outside or 
inside or somewhere, they may start to think, 
which is very dangerous, because they're not 
competent to think. Therefore it's important 
to distract them and marginalize them. 

That's one conception of democracy. In 
fact, going back to the business community, 
the last legal victory for labor really was 1935, 
the Wagner Act. After the war came, the unions 
declined as did a very rich working class cul- 
ture that was associated with the unions. That 
was destroyed. We moved to a business-run 
society at a remarkable level. This is the only 
state -capitalist industrial society which does- 
n't have even the normal social contract that 
you find in comparable societies. Outside of 
South Africa, I guess, this is the only industrial 
society that doesn't have national health care. 
There's no general commitment to even min- 
imal standards of survival for the parts of the 
population who can't follow those rules and 
gain things for themselves individually. 
Unions are virtually nonexistent. Other forms 
of popular structure are virtually nonexistent. 
There are no political parties or organizations. 
It's a long way toward the ideal, at least struc- 
turally. The media are a corporate monopoly. 



They have the same point of view. The two par- 
ties are two factions of the business party. Most 
of the population doesn't even bother voting 
because it looks meaningless. They're mar- 
ginalized and properly distracted. At least that's 
the goal. The leading figure in the public rela- 
tions industry, Edward Bernays, actually came 
out of the Creel Commission. He was part of 
it, learned his lessons there and went on to 
develop what he called the "engineering of con- 
sent," which he described as "the essence of 
democracy." The people who are able to engi- 
neer consent are the ones who have the 
resources and the power to do it — the business 
community — and that's who you work for. 



ENGINEERING OPINION 

It is also necessary to whip up the population 
in support of foreign adventures. Usually the 
population is pacifist, just like they were dur- 
ing the First World War. The public sees no rea- 
son to get involved in foreign adventures, 
killing, and torture. So you have to whip them 
up. And to whip them up you have to frighten 
them. Bernays himself had an important 
achievement in this respect. He was the per- 
son who ran the public relations campaign for 
the United Fruit Company in 1954, when the 
United States moved in to overthrow the cap- 
italist-democratic government of Guatemala 
and installed a murderous death-squad society, 
which remains that way to the present day 
with constant infusions of U.S. aid to prevent 
in more than empty form democratic devia- 
tions. It's necessary to constantly ram through 
domestic programs which the public is 
opposed to, because there is no reason for the 
public to be in favor of domestic programs that 
are harmful to them. This, too, takes extensive 
propaganda. We've seen a lot of this in the last 
ten years. The Reagan programs were over- 



