pletons more or less on course. This became a 



substantial part of contemporary political sci- 
ence. In the 1920s and early 1930s, Harold Lass- 
well, the founder of the modern field of 
communications and one of the leading Amer- 
ican political scientists, explained that we 
should not succumb to "democratic dogma- 
tisms about men being the best judges of their 
own interests." Because they're not. We're the 
best judges of the public interests. Therefore, 
just out of ordinary morality, we have to make 
sure that they don't have an opportunity to act 
on the basis of their misjudgments . In what is 
nowadays called a totalitarian state, or a mil- 
itary state, it's easy. You just hold a bludgeon 
over their heads, and if they get out of line you 
smash them over the head. But as society has 
become more free and democratic, you lose 
that capacity. Therefore you have to turn to the 
techniques of propaganda. The logic is clear. 
Propaganda is to a democracy what the blud- 
geon is to a totalitarian state. That's wise and 
good because, again, the common interests 
elude the bewildered herd. They can't figure 
them out. 



PUBLIC RELATIONS 

The United States pioneered the public rela- 
tions industry. Its commitment was "to con- 
trol the public mind/' as its leaders put it. They 
learned a lot from the successes of the Creel 
Commission and the successes in creating the 
Red Scare and its aftermath. The public rela- 
tions industry underwent a huge expansion at 
that time. It succeeded for some time in cre- 
ating almost total subordination of the public 
to business rule through the 1920s. This was 
so extreme that Congressional committees 
began to investigate it as we moved into the 

1930s. That's where a lot of our information 
about it comes from. 

Public relations is a huge industry. They're 
spending by now something on the order of a 
billion dollars a year. All along its commitment 
was to controlling the public mind. In the 

1930s, big problems arose again, as they had 
during the First World War. There was a huge 
depression and substantial labor organizing. In 
fact, in 1935 labor won its first major legisla- 
tive victory, namely, the right to organize, with 
the Wagner Act. That raised two serious prob- 



lems. For one thing, democracy was misfunc- 
tioning. The bewildered herd was actually win- 
ning legislative victories, and it's not supposed 
to work that way. The other problem was that 
itwasbecomingpossibleforpeopletoorganize. 
People have to be atomized and segregated and 
alone. They're not supposed to organize, 
becausethen they might be something beyond 
spectators of action. They might actually be 
participants if many people with limited 
resources could get together to enter the polit- 
ical arena. That's really threatening, A major 
response was taken on the part of business to 
ensure that this would be the last legislative 
victory for labor and that it would be the begin- 
ning of the end of this democratic deviation of 
popular organization. It worked. That was the 
last legislative victory for labor. From that 
point on — although the number of people in 
the unions increased for a while during the 
World War II, after which it started drop- 
ping — the capacity to act through the unions 
began to steadily drop. It wasn't by accident. 
We're now talking about the business com- 
munity, which spends lots and lots of money, 
attention, and thought into how to deal with 
these problems through the public relations 
industry and other organizations, like the 



National Association of Manufacturers and the 
Business Roundtable, and so on. They imme- 
diately set to work to try to find a way to 
counter these democratic deviations. 

The first trial was one year later, in 1937. 
