movement, the feminist movement, the anti- 
nuclear movement, and others. In the 1980s 
there was an even greater expansion to the sol- 
idarity movements, which is something very 
new and important in the history of at least 
American, and maybe even world dissidence. 
These were movements that not only 
protested but actually involved themselves, 
often intimately, in the lives of suffering peo- 
ple elsewhere. They learned a great deal from 
it and had quite a civilizing effect on main- 
stream America. All of this has made a very 
large difference. Anyone who has been 
involved in this kind of activity for many years 



must be aware of this. I know myself that the 
kind of talks I give today in the most reac- 
tionary parts of the country — central Georgia, 
rural Kentucky, etc. — are talks of the kind that 
I couldn't have given at the peak of the peace 
movement to the most active peace movement 
audience. Now you can give them anywhere. 
People may agree or not agree, but at least they 
understand what you're talking about and 
there's some sort of common ground that you 
can pursue. 

These are all signs of the civilizing effect, 
despite all the propaganda, despite all the 
efforts to control thought and manufacture 
consent. Nevertheless, people are acquiring an 
ability and a willingness to think things 
through. Skepticism about power has grown, 
and attitudes have changed on many, many 
issues. It's kind of slow, maybe even glacial, 
but perceptible and important. Whether it's 
fast enough to make a significant difference in 
what happens in the world is another question. 
Just to take one familiar example of it: The 
famous gender gap. In the 1960s attitudes of 
men and women were approximately the 
same on such matters as the "martial virtues" 
and the sickly inhibitions against the use of 
military force. Nobody, neither men nor 



women, were suffering from those sickly 
inhibitions in the early 1960s. The responses 
were the same. Everybody thought that the use 
of violence to suppress people out there was 
just right. Over the years it's changed. The 
sickly inhibitions have increased all across the 
board. But meanwhile a gap has been growing, 
and by now it's a very substantial gap. Accord- 
ing to polls, it's something like twenty-five 
percent. What has happened? What has hap- 
pened is that there is some form of at least 
semi-organized popular movement that 
women are involved in — the feminist move- 
ment. Organization has its effects. It means 
that you discover that you're not alone. Oth- 
ers have the same thoughts that you do. You 
can reinforce your thoughts and learn more 
about what you think and believe. These are 
very informal movements, not like a mem- 
bership organizations, just a mood that 
involves interactions among people. It has a 
very noticeable effect. That's the danger of 
democracy: If organizations can develop, if 
people are no longer just glued to the tube, you 
may have all these funny thoughts arising in 
their heads, like sickly inhibitions against the 
use of military force. That has to be overcome, 
but it hasn't been overcome. 



PARADE OF ENEMIES 



Instead of talking about the last war, let me 
talk about the next war, because sometimes it's 
useful to be prepared instead of just reacting. 
There is a very characteristic development 
going on in the United States now. It's not the 
first country in the world that's done this. 
There are growing domestic social and eco- 
nomic problems, in fact, maybe catastrophes. 
Nobody in power has any intention of doing 
anything about them. If you look at the 
domestic programs of the administrations of 
the past ten years — I include here the Democ- 
ratic opposition — there's really no serious pro- 
posal about what to do about the severe 
problems of health, education, homelessness, 
joblessness, crime, soaring criminal popula- 
