George Bush couldn't say that, because sanc- 
tions apparently had worked, and there was 
every reason to believe that negotiations could 
work — except that he adamantly refused to 
pursue them, saying explicitly, there will be no 
negotiations right through. Did you find any- 
body in the press who pointed that out? No. It's 
a triviality. It's something that, again, a liter- 
ate teenager could figure out in a minute. But 
nobody pointed it out, no commentator, no edi- 
torial writer. That, again, is the sign of a very 
well-run totalitarian culture. It shows that the 
manufacture of consent is working. 

Last comment about this. We could give 
many examples, you could make them up as 
you go along. Take the idea that Saddam Hus- 
sein is a monster about to conquer the world — 
widely believed, in the United States, and not 
unrealistically. It was drilled into people's 
heads over and over again: He's about to take 
everything. We've got to stop him now. How 
did he get that powerful? This is a small, third- 
world country without an industrial base. For 
eight years Iraq had been fighting Iran. That's 
post-revolutionary Iran, which had decimated 
its officer corps and most of its military force. 
Iraq had a little bit of support in that war. It was 
backed by the Soviet Union, the United States, 



Europe, the major Arab countries, and the Arab 
oil producers. It couldn't defeat Iran. But all of 
a sudden it's ready to conquer the world. Did 
you find anybody who pointed that out? The 
fact of the matter is, this was a third-world 
country with a peasant army. It is now being 
conceded that there was a ton of disinforma- 
tion about the fortifications, the chemical 
weapons, etc. But did you find anybody who 
pointedit out? No. You found virtually nobody 
who pointed it out. That's typical. Notice that 
this was done one year after exactly the same 
thing was done with Manuel Noriega. Manuel 
Noriega is a minor thug by comparison with 
George Bush's friend Saddam Hussein or 
George Bush's other friends in Beijing or 
George Bush himself, for that matter. In com- 
parison with them, Manuel Noriega is a pretty 
