Then, there is the bewildered herd, and they 
have a function in democracy too. Their func- 
tion in a democracy, he said, is to be "specta- 
tors," not participants in action. But they have 
more of a function than that, because it's a 



democracy. Occasionally they are allowed to 
lend their weight to one or another member of 
the specialized class. In other words, they're 
allowed to say, "We want you to be our leader" 
or "We want you to be our leader." That's 
because it's a democracy and not a totalitarian 
state. That's called an election. But once 
they've lent their weight to one or another 
member of the specialized class they're sup- 
posed to sink back and become spectators of 
action, but not participants. That's in a prop- 
erly functioning democracy. 

And there's a logic behind it. There's even 
a kind of compelling moral principle behind 
it. The compelling moral principle is that the 
mass of the public are just too stupid to be 
able to understand things. If they try to par- 
ticipate in managing their own affairs, they're 
just going to cause trouble. Therefore, it 
would be immoral and improper to permit 
them to do this. We have to tame the bewil- 
dered herd, not allow the bewildered herd to 
rage and trample and destroy things. It's pretty 
much the same logic that says that it would 
be improper to let a three-year-old run across 
the street. You don't give a three-year-old that 
kind of freedom because the three-year-old 
doesn't know how to handle that freedom. 



Correspondingly, you don't allow the bewil- 
dered herd to become participants in action. 
They'll just cause trouble. 

So we need something to tame the bewil- 
dered herd, and that something is this new 
revolution in the art of democracy: the manu- 
facture of consent. The media, the schools, and 
popular culture have to be divided. For the 
political class and the decision makers they 
have to provide them some tolerable sense of 
reality, although they also have to instill the 
proper beliefs. Just remember, there is an 
unstated premise here. The unstated premise 
— and even the responsible men have to dis- 
guise this from themselves — has to do with the 
question of how they get into the position 
where they have the authority to make deci- 
sions. The way they do that, of course, is by 
serving people with real power. The people 
with real power are the ones who own the soci- 
ety, which is a pretty narrow group. If the spe- 
cialized class can come along and say, I can 
serve your interests, then they'll be part of the 
executive group. You've got to keep that quiet. 
That means they have to have instilled in them 
the beliefs and doctrines that will serve the 
interests of private power. Unless they can 
master that skill, they're not part of the spe- 



cialized class. So we have one kind of educa- 
tional system directed to the responsible men, 
the specialized class. They have to be deeply 
indoctrinated in the values and interests of pri- 
vate power and the state-corporate nexus that 
represents it. If they can achieve that, then they 
can be part of the specialized class. The rest of 
the bewildered herd basically just have to be 
distracted. Turn their attention to something 
else. Keep them out of trouble. Make sure that 
they remain at most spectators of action, occa- 
sionally lending their weight to one or another 
of the real leaders, who they may select 
among. 

This point of view has been developed by 
lots of other people. In fact, it's pretty con- 
ventional. For example, the leading theologian 
and foreign policy critic Reinhold Niebuhr, 
sometimes called "the theologian of the estab- 
lishment, " the guru of George Kennan and the 
Kennedy intellectuals, put it that rationality is 
a very narrowly restricted skill. Only a small 
number of people have it. Most people are 
guided by just emotion and impulse. Those of 
us who have rationality have to create "nec- 
essary illusions" and emotionally potent 
"oversimpli-fications" to keep the naive sim- 
