
Let's take the question of the reasons for 
the war. Reasons were offered for the war. The 
reasons are: aggressors cannot be rewarded and 
aggression must be reversed by the quick resort 
to violence; that was the reason for the war. 
There was basically no other reason advanced. 
Can that possibly be the reason for the war? 



Does the United States uphold those principles, 
that aggressors cannot be rewarded and that 
aggression must be reversed by a quick resort 
to violence? I won't insult your intelligence by 
running through the facts, but the fact is those 
arguments could be refuted in two minutes by 
a literate teenager. However, they never were 
refuted. Take a look at the media, the liberal 
commentators and critics, the people who 
testified in Congress and see whether anybody 
questioned the assumption that the United 
States stands up to those principles. Has the 
United States opposed its own aggression in 
Panama and insisted on bombing Washington 
to reverse it? When the South African occupa- 
tion of Namibia was declared illegal in 1969, 
did the United States impose sanctions on food 
and medicine? Did it go to war? Did it bomb 
Capetown? No, it carried out twenty years of 
"quiet diplomacy." It wasn't very pretty dur- 
ing those twenty years. In the years of the Rea- 
gan-Bush administration alone, about 1.5 
million people were killed by S outh Afric a j u st 
in the surrounding countries. Forget what was 
happening in South Africa and Namibia. Some- 
how that didn't sear our sensitive souls. We 
continued with "quite diplomacy" and ended 
up with ample reward for the aggressors. They 



were given the major port in Namibia and 
plenty of advantages that took into account 
their security concerns. Where is this princi- 
ple that we uphold? Again, it's child's play to 
demonstrate that those couldn't possibly have 
been the reasons for going to war, because we 
don't uphold these principles. But nobody did 
it — that's what's important. And nobody both- 
