what's going on in a torture chamber. This 
160-page report of the prisoners' sworn testi- 
mony was sneaked out of prison, along with a 
videotape which was taken showing people tes- 
tifying in prison about their torture. It was dis- 
tributed by the Marin County Interfaith Task 
Force. The national press refused to cover it. 
The TV stations refused to run it. There was an 
article in the local Marin County newspaper, 
the San Francisco Examiner, and I think that's 
all. No one else would touch it. This was a time 
when there was more than a few "light-headed 
and cold-blooded Western intellectuals" who 
were singing the praises of Jose Napoleon 
Duarte and of Ronald Reagan. Anaya was not 
the subject of any tributes. He didn't get on 
Human Rights Day. He wasn't appointed to 
anything. He was released in a prisoner 
exchange and then assassinated, apparently by 
the U.S. -backed security forces. Very little infor- 
mation about that ever appeared. The media 
never asked whether exposure of the atroci- 
ties — instead of sitting on them and silencing 
them — might have saved his life. 



This tells you something about the way a 
well-functioning system of consent manufac- 
turing works. In comparison with the revela- 
tions of Herbert Anaya in El Salvador, 
Valladares's memoirs are not even a pea next 
to the mountain. But you've got your job to do. 
That takes us toward the next war. I expect, 
we're going to hear more and more of this, until 
the next operation takes place. 

A few remarks about the last one. Let's 
turn finally to that. Let me begin with this Uni- 
versity of Massachusetts study that I men- 
tioned before. It has some interesting 
conclusions. In the study people were asked 
whether they thought that the United States 
should intervene with force to reverse illegal 
occupation or serious human rights abuses. By 
about two to one, people in the United States 
thought we should. We should use force in the 
case of illegal occupation of land and severe 
human rights abuses. If the United States was 
to follow that advice, we would bomb El Sal- 
