

98765 



The role of the media 
in contemporary politics forces us to ask what 
kind of a world and what kind of a society we 
want to live in, and in particular in what sense 
of democracy do we want this to be a democ- 
ratic society? Let me begin by counter-posing 
two different conceptions of democracy. One 
conception of democracy has it that a democ- 
ratic society is one in which the public has the 
means to participate in some meaningful way 
in the management of their own affairs and the 
means of information are open and free. If you 
look up democracy in the dictionary you'll get 
a definition something like that. 



An alternative conception of democracy is 
that the public must be barred from managing 
of their own affairs and the means of informa- 
tion must be kept narrowly and rigidly con- 
trolled. That may sound like an odd conception 
of democracy, but it's important to understand 
that it is the prevailing conception. In fact, it 
has long been, not just in operation, but even 
in theory. There's a long history that goes back 
to the earliest modern democratic revolutions 
in seventeenth century England which largely 
expresses this point of view. I'm just going to 
keep to the modern period and say a few words 
about how that notion of democracy develops 
and why and how the problem of media and dis- 
information enters within that context. 



EARLY HISTORY OF PROPAGANDA 



Let's begin with the first modern government 
propaganda operation. That was under the 
Woodrow Wilson Administration. Woodrow 
Wilson was elected President in 1916 on the 
platform "Peace Without Victory." That was 
right in the middle of the World War I. The pop- 
ulation was extremely pacifistic and saw no rea- 
son to become involved in a European war. The 
Wilson administration was actually committed 
to war and had to do something about it. They 
established a government propaganda com- 
mission, called the Creel Commission which 
succeeded, within six months, in turning a 
pacifist population into a hysterical, war-mon- 
gering population which wanted to destroy 
everything German, tear the Germans limb 
from limb, go to war and save the world. That 
was a major achievement, and it led to a further 
achievement. Right at that time and after the 
war the same techniques were used to whip up 
a hysterical Red Scare, as it was called, which 
succeeded pretty much in destroying unions 
and eliminating such dangerous problems as 
freedom of the press and freedom of political 



thought. There was very strong support from 
the media, from the business establishment, 
which in fact organized, pushed much of this 
work, and it was, in general, a great success. 

Among those who participated actively and 
enthusiastically in Wilson's war were the pro- 
gressive intellectuals, people of the John 
Dewey circle, who took great pride, as you can 
see from their own writings at the time, in hav- 
ing shown that what they called the "more 
intelligent members of the community," 
namely, themselves, were able to drive a 
reluctant population into a war by terrifying 
them and eliciting jingoist fanaticism. The 
means that were used were extensive. For 
example, there was a good deal of fabrication 
of atrocities by the Huns, Belgian babies with 
their arms torn off, all sorts of awful things that 
you still read in history books. Much of it was 
invented by the British propaganda ministry, 
whose own commitment at the time, as they 
put it in their secret deliberations, was "to 
direct the thought of most of the world." But 
more crucially they wanted to control the 
thought of the more intelligent members of the 
community in the United States, who would 
