ered to point out the conclusion that follows: 
No reason was given for going to war. None. 
No reason was given for going to war that could 
not be refuted by a literate teenager in about 
two minutes. That again is the hallmark of a 
totalitarian culture. It ought to frighten us, that 
we are so deeply totalitarian that we can be dri- 
ven to war without any reason being given for 
it and without anybody noticing Lebanon's 
request or caring. It's a very striking fact. 

Right before the bombing started, in mid- 
January, a major Washington Post- ABC poll 
revealed something interesting. People were 
asked, If Iraq would agree to withdraw from 
Kuwait in return for Security Council consid- 
eration of the problem of Arab-Israeli conflict, 
would you be in favor of that? By about two-to- 
one, the population was in favor of that. So was 
the whole world, including the Iraqi democra- 
tic opposition. So it was reported that two- 



thirds of the American population were in favor 
of that. Presumably, the people who were in 
favor of that thought they were the only ones 
in the world to think so. Certainly nobody in 
the press had said that it would be a good idea. 
The orders from Washington have been, we're 
supposed to be against "linkage," that is, 
diplomacy, and therefore everybody goose- 
stepped on command and everybody was 
against diplomacy. Try to find commentary in 
the press — you can find a column by Alex Cock- 
burn in the Los Angeles Times, who argued that 
it would be a good idea. The people who were 
answering that question thought, I'm alone, but 
that's what I think. Suppose they knew that 
they weren't alone, that other people thought 
it, like the Iraqi democratic opposition. Suppose 
that they knew that this was not hypothetical, 
that in fact Iraq had made exactly such an offer. 
It had been released by high U.S. officials just 
eight days earlier. On January 2, these officials 
had released an Iraqi offer to withdraw totally 
from Kuwait in return for consideration by the 
Security Council of the Arab-Israeli conflict and 
the problem of weapons of mass destruction. 
The United States had been refusing to negoti- 
ate this issue since well before the invasion of 
Kuwait. Suppose that people had known that 



the offer was actually on the table and that it 
was widely supported and that in fact it's 
exactly the kind of thing that any rational per- 
son would do if they were interested in peace, 
as we do in other cases, in the rare cases that 
we do want to reverse aggression. Suppose that 
it had been known. You can make your own 
guesses, but I would assume that the two-thirds 
would probably have risen to 98 percent of the 
population. Here you have the great successes 
of propaganda. Probably not one person who 
answered the poll knew any of the things I've 
just mentioned. The people thought they were 
alone. Therefore it was possible to proceed with 
the war policy without opposition. 

There was a good deal of discussion about 
whether sanctions would work. You had the 
head of the CIA come up and discuss whether 
sanctions would work. However, there was no 
discussion of a much more obvious question: 
Had sanctions already worked? The answer is 
yes, apparently they had — probably by late 
August, very likely by late December. It was 
very hard to think up any other reason for the 
Iraqi offers of withdrawal, which were authen- 
ticated or in some cases released by high U.S. 
officials, who described them as "serious" and 
"negotiable." So the real question is: Had sane- 



tions already worked? Was there a way out? 
Was there a way out in terms quite acceptable 
to the general population, the world at large 
and the Iraqi democratic opposition? These 
questions were not discussed, and it's crucial 
for a well-functioning propaganda system that 
they not be discussed. That enables the chair- 
man of the Republican National Committee to 
say that if any Democrat had been in office, 
Kuwait would not be liberated today. He can 
say that and no Democrat would get up and say 
that if I were president it would have been lib- 
erated not only today but six months ago, 
