have to provide them some tolerable sense of 
reality, although they also have to instill the 
proper beliefs. Just remember, there is an 
unstated premise here. The unstated premise 
— and even the responsible men have to dis- 
guise this from themselves — has to do with the 
question of how they get into the position 
where they have the authority to make deci- 
sions. The way they do that, of course, is by 
serving people with real power. The people 
with real power are the ones who own the soci- 
ety, which is a pretty narrow group. If the spe- 
cialized class can come along and say, I can 
serve your interests, then they'll be part of the 
executive group. You've got to keep that quiet. 
That means they have to have instilled in them 
the beliefs and doctrines that will serve the 
interests of private power. Unless they can 
master that skill, they're not part of the spe- 



cialized class. So we have one kind of educa- 
tional system directed to the responsible men, 
the specialized class. They have to be deeply 
indoctrinated in the values and interests of pri- 
vate power and the state-corporate nexus that 
represents it. If they can achieve that, then they 
can be part of the specialized class. The rest of 
the bewildered herd basically just have to be 
distracted. Turn their attention to something 
else. Keep them out of trouble. Make sure that 
they remain at most spectators of action, occa- 
sionally lending their weight to one or another 
of the real leaders, who they may select 
among. 

This point of view has been developed by 
lots of other people. In fact, it's pretty con- 
ventional. For example, the leading theologian 
and foreign policy critic Reinhold Niebuhr, 
sometimes called "the theologian of the estab- 
lishment, " the guru of George Kennan and the 
Kennedy intellectuals, put it that rationality is 
a very narrowly restricted skill. Only a small 
number of people have it. Most people are 
guided by just emotion and impulse. Those of 
us who have rationality have to create "nec- 
essary illusions" and emotionally potent 
"oversimpli-fications" to keep the naive sim- 
