none of these sickly inhibitions about using 
violence. So that's the Vietnam Syndrome. It's 
necessary to overcome that one. 



REPRESENTATION AS REALITY 



It's also necessary to completely falsify history. 
That's another way to overcome these sickly 
inhibitions, to make it look as if when we 
attack and destroy somebody we're really pro- 
tecting and defending ourselves against major 
aggressors and monsters and so on. There has 
been a huge effort since the Vietnam war to 
reconstruct the history of that. Too many peo- 
ple began to understand what was really going 
on. Including plenty of soldiers and a lot of 
young people who were involved with the peace 
movement and others. That was bad. It was nec- 
essary to rearrange those bad thoughts and to 
restore some form of sanity, namely, a recog- 
nition that whatever we do is noble and right. 
If we're bombing South Vietnam, that's because 
we're defending South Vietnam against some- 
body, namely, the South Vietnamese, since 
nobody else was there. It's what the Kennedy 
intellectuals called defense against "internal 
aggression" in South Vietnam. That was the 
phrase used by Adlai Stevenson and others. It 
was necessary to make that the official and well 
understood picture. That's worked pretty well. 



When you have total control over the media and 
the educational system and scholarship is con- 
formist, you can get that across. One indication 
of it was revealed in a study done at the Uni- 
versity of Massachusetts on attitudes toward 
the current Gulf crisis — a study of beliefs and 
attitudes in television watching. One of the 
questions asked in that study was, How many 
Vietnamese casualties would you estimate 
that there were during the Vietnam war? The 
average response on the part of Americans today 
is about 1 00,000. The official figure is about two 
million. The actual figure is probably three to 
four million. The people who conducted the 
study raised an appropriate question: What 
would we think about German political culture 
if, when you asked people today how many Jews 
died in the Holocaust, they estimated about 
300,000? What would that tell us about German 
political culture? They leave the question 
unanswered, but you can pursue it. What does 
it tell us about our culture? It tells us quite a 
bit. It is necessary to overcome the sickly inhi- 
bitions against the use of military force and 
other democratic deviations. In this particular 
case it worked. This is true on every topic. Pick 
the topic you like: the Middle East, interna- 
tional terrorism, Central America, whatever it 



is — the picture of the world that's presented to 
the public has only the remotest relation to 
reality. The truth of the matter is buried under 
edifice after edifice of lies upon lies. It's all been 
a marvelous success from the point of view in 
deterring the threat of democracy, achieved 
under conditions of freedom, which is 
extremely interesting. It's not like a totalitar- 
ian state, where it's done by force. These 
achievements are under conditions of freedom. 
If we want to understand our own society, we'll 
have to think about these facts. They are impor- 
tant facts, important for those who care about 
what kind of society they live in. 



DISSIDENT CULTURE 



Despite all of this, the dissident culture sur- 
vived. It's grown quite a lot since the 1960s. In 
the 1960s the dissident culture first of all was 
extremely slow in developing. There was no 
protest against the Indochina war until years 
after the United States had started bombing 
South Vietnam. When it did grow it was a very 
narrow dissident movement, mostly students 
and young people. By the 1970s that had 
changed considerably. Major popular move- 
ments had developed: the environmental 
