because there were opportunities then that I 
would have pursued and Kuwait would have 
been liberated without killing tens of thou- 
sands of people and without causing an envi- 
ronmental catastrophe. No Democrat would 
say that because no Democrat took that posi- 
tion. Henry Gonzalez and Barbara Boxer took 
that position. But the number of people who 
took it is so marginal that it's virtually nonex- 
istent. Given the fact that almost no Democ- 
ratic politician would say that, Clayton 
Yeutter is free to make his statements. 

When Scud missiles hit Israel, nobody in 
the press applauded. Again, that's an interest- 
ing fact about a well-functioning propaganda 



system. We might ask, why not? After all, Sad- 
dam Hussein's arguments were as good as 
George Bush's arguments. What were they, 
after all? Let's just take Lebanon. Saddam Hus- 
sein says that he can't stand annexation. He 
can't let Israel annex the Syrian Golan Heights 
and East Jerusalem, in opposition to the unan- 
imous agreement of the Security Council. He 
can't stand annexation. He can't stand aggres- 
sion. Israel has been occupying southern 
Lebanon since 1978 in violation of Security 
Council resolutions that it refuses to abide by. 
In the course of that period it attacked all of 
Lebanon, still bombs most of Lebanon at will. 
He can't stand it. He might have read the 
Amnesty International report on Israeli atroc- 
ities in the West Bank. His heart is bleeding. 
He can't stand it. Sanctions can't work because 
the United States vetoes them. Negotiations 
won't work because the United States blocks 
them. What's left but force? He's been waiting 
for years. Thirteen years in the case of 
Lebanon, 20 years in the case of the West Bank. 
You've heard that argument before. The only 
difference between that argument and the one 
you heard is that Saddam Hussein could truly 
say sanctions and negotiations can't work 
because the United States blocks them. But 



George Bush couldn't say that, because sanc- 
tions apparently had worked, and there was 
every reason to believe that negotiations could 
work — except that he adamantly refused to 
pursue them, saying explicitly, there will be no 
negotiations right through. Did you find any- 
body in the press who pointed that out? No. It's 
a triviality. It's something that, again, a liter- 
ate teenager could figure out in a minute. But 
nobody pointed it out, no commentator, no edi- 
torial writer. That, again, is the sign of a very 
well-run totalitarian culture. It shows that the 
manufacture of consent is working. 

Last comment about this. We could give 
many examples, you could make them up as 
you go along. Take the idea that Saddam Hus- 
sein is a monster about to conquer the world — 
widely believed, in the United States, and not 
unrealistically. It was drilled into people's 
heads over and over again: He's about to take 
everything. We've got to stop him now. How 
did he get that powerful? This is a small, third- 
world country without an industrial base. For 
eight years Iraq had been fighting Iran. That's 
post-revolutionary Iran, which had decimated 
its officer corps and most of its military force. 
Iraq had a little bit of support in that war. It was 
backed by the Soviet Union, the United States, 



Europe, the major Arab countries, and the Arab 
oil producers. It couldn't defeat Iran. But all of 
a sudden it's ready to conquer the world. Did 
you find anybody who pointed that out? The 
fact of the matter is, this was a third-world 
country with a peasant army. It is now being 
conceded that there was a ton of disinforma- 
tion about the fortifications, the chemical 
weapons, etc. But did you find anybody who 
pointedit out? No. You found virtually nobody 
who pointed it out. That's typical. Notice that 
this was done one year after exactly the same 
thing was done with Manuel Noriega. Manuel 
Noriega is a minor thug by comparison with 
George Bush's friend Saddam Hussein or 
George Bush's other friends in Beijing or 
George Bush himself, for that matter. In com- 
parison with them, Manuel Noriega is a pretty 
