in the public record. 

Since August it became a little harder to 
ignore their existence. In August we suddenly 
turned against Saddam Hussein after having 
favored him for many years. Here was an Iraqi 
democratic opposition who ought to have some 
thoughts about the matter. They would be 
happy to see Saddam Hussein drawn and quar- 
tered. He killed their brothers, tortured their 
sisters, and drove them out of the country. 
They have been fighting against his tyranny 
throughout the whole time that Ronald Reagan 
and George Bush were cherishing him. What 
about their voices? Take a look at the national 
media and see how much you can find about 
the Iraqi democratic opposition from August 
through March (1991). You can't find a word. 
It's not that they're inarticulate. They have 
statements, proposals, calls and demands. If 
you look at them, you find that they're indis- 
tinguishable from those of the American peace 
movement. They're against Saddam Hussein 
and they're against the war against Iraq. They 
don't want their country destroyed. What they 



want is a peaceful resolution, and they knew 
perfectly well that it might have been achiev- 
able. That's the wrong view and therefore 
they're out. We don't hear a word about the 
Iraqi democratic opposition. If you want to find 
out about them, pick up the German press, or 
the British press. They don't say much about 
them, but they're less controlled than we are 
and they say something. 

This is a spectacular achievement of pro- 
paganda. First, that the voices of the Iraqi 
democrats are completely excluded, and sec- 
ond, that nobody notices it. That's interesting, 
too. It takes a really deeply indoctrinated pop- 
ulation not to notice that we're not hearing the 
voices of the Iraqi democratic opposition and 
not asking the question, Why? and finding out 
the obvious answer: because the Iraqi democ- 
rats have their own thoughts; they agree with 
the international peace movement and there- 
fore they're out. 

Let's take the question of the reasons for 
the war. Reasons were offered for the war. The 
reasons are: aggressors cannot be rewarded and 
aggression must be reversed by the quick resort 
to violence; that was the reason for the war. 
There was basically no other reason advanced. 
Can that possibly be the reason for the war? 



Does the United States uphold those principles, 
that aggressors cannot be rewarded and that 
aggression must be reversed by a quick resort 
to violence? I won't insult your intelligence by 
running through the facts, but the fact is those 
arguments could be refuted in two minutes by 
a literate teenager. However, they never were 
refuted. Take a look at the media, the liberal 
commentators and critics, the people who 
testified in Congress and see whether anybody 
questioned the assumption that the United 
States stands up to those principles. Has the 
United States opposed its own aggression in 
Panama and insisted on bombing Washington 
to reverse it? When the South African occupa- 
tion of Namibia was declared illegal in 1969, 
did the United States impose sanctions on food 
and medicine? Did it go to war? Did it bomb 
Capetown? No, it carried out twenty years of 
"quiet diplomacy." It wasn't very pretty dur- 
ing those twenty years. In the years of the Rea- 
gan-Bush administration alone, about 1.5 
million people were killed by S outh Afric a j u st 
in the surrounding countries. Forget what was 
happening in South Africa and Namibia. Some- 
how that didn't sear our sensitive souls. We 
continued with "quite diplomacy" and ended 
up with ample reward for the aggressors. They 



were given the major port in Namibia and 
plenty of advantages that took into account 
their security concerns. Where is this princi- 
ple that we uphold? Again, it's child's play to 
demonstrate that those couldn't possibly have 
been the reasons for going to war, because we 
don't uphold these principles. But nobody did 
it — that's what's important. And nobody both- 
