whelmingly unpopular. Voters in the 1984 
"Reagan landslide," by about three to two, 
hoped that his policies would not be enacted. 
If you take particular programs, like arma- 
ments, cutting back on social spending, etc., 
almost every one of them was overwhelmingly 
opposed by the public. But as long as people are 
marginalized and distracted and have no way 
to organize or articulate their sentiments, or 
even know that others have these sentiments, 
people who said that they prefer social spend- 
ing to military spending, who gave that answer 
on polls, as people overwhelmingly did, 
assumed that they were the only people with 
that crazy idea in their heads. They never heard 
it from anywhere else. Nobody's supposed to 
think that. Therefore, if you do think it and you 
answer it in apoll, you just assume that you're 
sort of weird. Since there's no way to get 
together with other people who share or rein- 
force that view and help you articulate it, you 
feel like an oddity, an oddball. So you just stay 
on the side and you don't pay any attention to 
what's going on. You look at something else, 
like the Superbowl. 

To a certain extent, then, that ideal was 
achieved, but never completely. There are insti- 
tutions which it has as yet been impossible to 



destroy. The churches, for example, still exist. 
A large part of the dissident activity in the 
United States comes out of the churches, for 
the simple reason that they're there. So when 
you go to a European country and give a polit- 
ical talk, it may very likely be in the union hall. 
Here that won't happen, because unions first 
of all barely exist, and if they do exist they're 
not political organizations. But the churches do 
exist, and therefore you often give a talk in a 
church. Central American solidarity work 
mostly grew out of the churches, mainly 
because they exist. 

The bewildered herd never gets properly 
tamed, so this is a constant battle. In the 1930s 
they arose again and were put down. In the 
1960s there was another wave of dissidence. 
There was a name for that. It was called by the 
specialized class "the crisis of democracy." 
Democracy was regarded as entering into a cri- 
sis in the 1960s. The crisis was that large seg- 
ments of the population were becoming 
organized and active and trying to participate 
in the political arena. Here we come back to 
these two conceptions of democracy. By the 
dictionary definition, that's an advance in 
democracy. By the prevailing conception that's 
a problem, a crisis that has to be overcome. The 



population has to be driven back to the apathy, 
obedience and passivity that is their proper 
■state. We therefore have to do something to 
overcome the crisis. Efforts were made to 
achieve that. It hasn't worked. The crisis of 
democracy is still alive and well, fortunately, 
but not very effective in changing policy. But 
it is effective in changing opinion, contrary to 
what a lot of people believe. Great efforts were 
made after the 1960s to try to reverse and over- 
come this malady. One aspect of the malady 
actually got a technical name. It was called the 
"Vietnam Syndrome." The Vietnam Syn- 
drome, a term that began to come up around 
1970, has actually been defined on occasion. 
The Reaganite intellectual Norman Podhoretz 
defined it as "the sickly inhibitions against the 
use of military force." There were these sickly 
inhibitions against violence on the part of a 
large part of the public. People just didn't 
understand why we should go around torturing 
people and killing people and carpet bombing 
them. It's very dangerous for a population to be 
overcome by these sickly inhibitions, as 
Goebbels understood, because then there's a 
limit on foreign adventures. It's necessary, as 
the Washington Post put it rather proudly dur- 
ing the Gulf War hysteria, to instill in people 



respect for "martial value." That's important. 
If you want to have a violent society that uses 
force around the world to achieve the ends of 
its own domestic elite, it's necessary to have 
a proper appreciation of the martial virtues and 
