$5.95 

"...1 



S8.5Q (Cdn.) £3.99 (U. 



The issue is whether we want to live in a free soci 
ety or whether we want to live under what amounts to 
form of self-imposed totalitarianism, with the bewildere 
herd marginalized, directed elsewhere, terrified, screar 
ing patriotic slogans, fearing for their lives and admirint 
with awe the leader who saved them from destruction, 
while the educated masses goose-step on command anc 
repeat the slogans they're supposed to repeat and the 
society deteriorates at home. We end up serving as a mer- 
cenary enforcer state, hoping that others are going to pa) 
us to smash up the world ..." 

— NOAM CHOMSKY, 
from Media Control: 
The Spectacular Achievements 
of Propaganda 

OPEN MEDIA PAMPHLET SERIES EDITORS 
GREG RUGGIERO AND STUART SAHULKA 



SEVEN STORIES PRESS 
140 Watts Street 
New York, NY 10013 
http://www.sevenstories.coti 

DISTRIBUTED TO THE TRADE 
BY PUBLISHERS GROUP WEST 





THE OPEN MEDIA PAMPHLET SERIES 



THE OPEN MEDIA PAMPHLET SERIES 




Series editors Greg fiuggiero and Stuart Sahulka 

m ^iiv flj^m 

SEVEN STORIES PRESS /New York 



Copyright © 1991, 1997 by Noam Chomsky 



A Seven Stories Press First Edition, 
published in association with Open Media. 

Open Media Pamphlet Series editors, 
Greg Ruggiero and Stuart Sahulka. 

All rights reserved. No part of this book may 
be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form, by any means, including 
mechanical, electric, photocopying, recording or 
otherwise, without the prior written permission 
of the publisher. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Chomsky, Noam. 

Media control: the spectacular achievements of 
propaganda / Noam Chomsky. 

p. cm. — (The Open Media Pamphlet Series) 

ISBN 1-888363-49-5 

1. Propaganda. 2. Propaganda — United States. 3. 
Mass media — Political aspects. 4. Mass media and 
public opinion. I. Title. II. Series. 
HM263.C447 1997 

303.375— dc21 96-53580 

CIP 

Book design by Cindy LaBreacht 



98765 



The role of the media 
in contemporary politics forces us to ask what 
kind of a world and what kind of a society we 
want to live in, and in particular in what sense 
of democracy do we want this to be a democ- 
ratic society? Let me begin by counter-posing 
two different conceptions of democracy. One 
conception of democracy has it that a democ- 
ratic society is one in which the public has the 
means to participate in some meaningful way 
in the management of their own affairs and the 
means of information are open and free. If you 
look up democracy in the dictionary you'll get 
a definition something like that. 



An alternative conception of democracy is 
that the public must be barred from managing 
of their own affairs and the means of informa- 
tion must be kept narrowly and rigidly con- 
trolled. That may sound like an odd conception 
of democracy, but it's important to understand 
that it is the prevailing conception. In fact, it 
has long been, not just in operation, but even 
in theory. There's a long history that goes back 
to the earliest modern democratic revolutions 
in seventeenth century England which largely 
expresses this point of view. I'm just going to 
keep to the modern period and say a few words 
about how that notion of democracy develops 
and why and how the problem of media and dis- 
information enters within that context. 



EARLY HISTORY OF PROPAGANDA 



Let's begin with the first modern government 
propaganda operation. That was under the 
Woodrow Wilson Administration. Woodrow 
Wilson was elected President in 1916 on the 
platform "Peace Without Victory." That was 
right in the middle of the World War I. The pop- 
ulation was extremely pacifistic and saw no rea- 
son to become involved in a European war. The 
Wilson administration was actually committed 
to war and had to do something about it. They 
established a government propaganda com- 
mission, called the Creel Commission which 
succeeded, within six months, in turning a 
pacifist population into a hysterical, war-mon- 
gering population which wanted to destroy 
everything German, tear the Germans limb 
from limb, go to war and save the world. That 
was a major achievement, and it led to a further 
achievement. Right at that time and after the 
war the same techniques were used to whip up 
a hysterical Red Scare, as it was called, which 
succeeded pretty much in destroying unions 
and eliminating such dangerous problems as 
freedom of the press and freedom of political 



thought. There was very strong support from 
the media, from the business establishment, 
which in fact organized, pushed much of this 
work, and it was, in general, a great success. 

Among those who participated actively and 
enthusiastically in Wilson's war were the pro- 
gressive intellectuals, people of the John 
Dewey circle, who took great pride, as you can 
see from their own writings at the time, in hav- 
ing shown that what they called the "more 
intelligent members of the community," 
namely, themselves, were able to drive a 
reluctant population into a war by terrifying 
them and eliciting jingoist fanaticism. The 
means that were used were extensive. For 
example, there was a good deal of fabrication 
of atrocities by the Huns, Belgian babies with 
their arms torn off, all sorts of awful things that 
you still read in history books. Much of it was 
invented by the British propaganda ministry, 
whose own commitment at the time, as they 
put it in their secret deliberations, was "to 
direct the thought of most of the world." But 
more crucially they wanted to control the 
thought of the more intelligent members of the 
community in the United States, who would 
then disseminate the propaganda that they 
were concocting and convert the pacifistic 



country to wartime hysteria. That worked. It 
worked very well. And it taught a lesson: State 
propaganda, when supported by the educated 
classes and when no deviation is permitted 
from it, can have a big effect. It was a lesson 
learned by Hitler and many others, and it has 
been pursued to this day. 



SPECTATOR DEMOCRACY 



Another group that was impressed by these 
successes was liberal democratic theorists and 
leading media figures, like, for example, Wal- 
ter Lippmann, who was the dean of American 
journalists, a major foreign and domestic pol- 
icy critic and also a major theorist of liberal 
democracy. If you take a look at his collected 
essays, you'll see that they're subtitled some- 
thing like "A Progressive Theory of Liberal 
Democratic Thought." Lippmann was 
involved in these propaganda commissions and 
recognized their achievements. He argued that 
what he called a "revolution in the art of 
democracy," could be used to "manufacture 
consent, " that is, to bring about agreement on 
the part of the public for things that they did- 
n't want by the new techniques of propaganda. 
He also thought that this was a good idea, in 
fact, necessary. It was necessary because, as he 
put it, "the common interests elude public 
opinion entirely" and can only be understood 
and managed by a "specialized class "of 
"responsible men" who are smart enough to 
figure things out. This theory asserts that only 



a small elite, the intellectual community that 
the Deweyites were talking about, can under- 
stand the common interests, what all of us 
care about, and that these things "elude the 
general public." This is a view that goes back 
hundreds of years. It's also a typical Leninist 
view. In fact, it has very close resemblance to 
the Leninist conception that a vanguard of rev- 
olutionary intellectuals take state power, 
using popular revolutions as the force that 
brings them to state power, and then drive the 
stupid masses toward a future that they're too 
dumb and incompetent to envision for them- 
selves. The liberal democratic theory and 
Marxism-Leninism are very close in their 
common ideological assumptions. I think 
that's one reason why people have found it so 
easy over the years to drift from one position 
to another without any particular sense of 
change. It's just a matter of assessing where 
power is. Maybe there will be a popular revo- 
lution, and that will put us into state power; 
or maybe there won't be, in which case we'll 
just work for the people with real power: the 
business community. But we'll do the same 
thing. We'll drive the stupid masses toward a 
world that they're too dumb to understand for 
themselves. 



Lippmann backed this up by a pretty elab- 
orated theory of progressive democracy. He 
argued that in a properly functioning democ- 
racy there are classes of citizens. There is first 
of all the class of citizens who have to take 
some active role in running general affairs. 
That's the specialized class. They are the peo- 
ple who analyze, execute, make decisions, and 
run things in the political, economic, and ide- 
ological systems. That's a small percentage of 
the population. Naturally, anyone who puts 
these ideas forth is always part of that small 
group, and they're talking about what to do 
about those others. Those others, who are out 
of the small group, the big majority of the pop- 
ulation, they are what Lippmann called "the 
bewildered herd. " We have to protect ourselves 
from "the trampling and roar of a bewildered 
herd". Now there are two "functions" in a 
democracy: The specialized class, the respon- 
sible men, carry out the executive function, 
which means they do the thinking and plan- 
ning and understand the common interests. 
Then, there is the bewildered herd, and they 
have a function in democracy too. Their func- 
tion in a democracy, he said, is to be "specta- 
tors," not participants in action. But they have 
more of a function than that, because it's a 



democracy. Occasionally they are allowed to 
lend their weight to one or another member of 
the specialized class. In other words, they're 
allowed to say, "We want you to be our leader" 
or "We want you to be our leader." That's 
because it's a democracy and not a totalitarian 
state. That's called an election. But once 
they've lent their weight to one or another 
member of the specialized class they're sup- 
posed to sink back and become spectators of 
action, but not participants. That's in a prop- 
erly functioning democracy. 

And there's a logic behind it. There's even 
a kind of compelling moral principle behind 
it. The compelling moral principle is that the 
mass of the public are just too stupid to be 
able to understand things. If they try to par- 
ticipate in managing their own affairs, they're 
just going to cause trouble. Therefore, it 
would be immoral and improper to permit 
them to do this. We have to tame the bewil- 
dered herd, not allow the bewildered herd to 
rage and trample and destroy things. It's pretty 
much the same logic that says that it would 
be improper to let a three-year-old run across 
the street. You don't give a three-year-old that 
kind of freedom because the three-year-old 
doesn't know how to handle that freedom. 



Correspondingly, you don't allow the bewil- 
dered herd to become participants in action. 
They'll just cause trouble. 

So we need something to tame the bewil- 
dered herd, and that something is this new 
revolution in the art of democracy: the manu- 
facture of consent. The media, the schools, and 
popular culture have to be divided. For the 
political class and the decision makers they 
have to provide them some tolerable sense of 
reality, although they also have to instill the 
proper beliefs. Just remember, there is an 
unstated premise here. The unstated premise 
— and even the responsible men have to dis- 
guise this from themselves — has to do with the 
question of how they get into the position 
where they have the authority to make deci- 
sions. The way they do that, of course, is by 
serving people with real power. The people 
with real power are the ones who own the soci- 
ety, which is a pretty narrow group. If the spe- 
cialized class can come along and say, I can 
serve your interests, then they'll be part of the 
executive group. You've got to keep that quiet. 
That means they have to have instilled in them 
the beliefs and doctrines that will serve the 
interests of private power. Unless they can 
master that skill, they're not part of the spe- 



cialized class. So we have one kind of educa- 
tional system directed to the responsible men, 
the specialized class. They have to be deeply 
indoctrinated in the values and interests of pri- 
vate power and the state-corporate nexus that 
represents it. If they can achieve that, then they 
can be part of the specialized class. The rest of 
the bewildered herd basically just have to be 
distracted. Turn their attention to something 
else. Keep them out of trouble. Make sure that 
they remain at most spectators of action, occa- 
sionally lending their weight to one or another 
of the real leaders, who they may select 
among. 

This point of view has been developed by 
lots of other people. In fact, it's pretty con- 
ventional. For example, the leading theologian 
and foreign policy critic Reinhold Niebuhr, 
sometimes called "the theologian of the estab- 
lishment, " the guru of George Kennan and the 
Kennedy intellectuals, put it that rationality is 
a very narrowly restricted skill. Only a small 
number of people have it. Most people are 
guided by just emotion and impulse. Those of 
us who have rationality have to create "nec- 
essary illusions" and emotionally potent 
"oversimpli-fications" to keep the naive sim- 
pletons more or less on course. This became a 



substantial part of contemporary political sci- 
ence. In the 1920s and early 1930s, Harold Lass- 
well, the founder of the modern field of 
communications and one of the leading Amer- 
ican political scientists, explained that we 
should not succumb to "democratic dogma- 
tisms about men being the best judges of their 
own interests." Because they're not. We're the 
best judges of the public interests. Therefore, 
just out of ordinary morality, we have to make 
sure that they don't have an opportunity to act 
on the basis of their misjudgments . In what is 
nowadays called a totalitarian state, or a mil- 
itary state, it's easy. You just hold a bludgeon 
over their heads, and if they get out of line you 
smash them over the head. But as society has 
become more free and democratic, you lose 
that capacity. Therefore you have to turn to the 
techniques of propaganda. The logic is clear. 
Propaganda is to a democracy what the blud- 
geon is to a totalitarian state. That's wise and 
good because, again, the common interests 
elude the bewildered herd. They can't figure 
them out. 



PUBLIC RELATIONS 

The United States pioneered the public rela- 
tions industry. Its commitment was "to con- 
trol the public mind/' as its leaders put it. They 
learned a lot from the successes of the Creel 
Commission and the successes in creating the 
Red Scare and its aftermath. The public rela- 
tions industry underwent a huge expansion at 
that time. It succeeded for some time in cre- 
ating almost total subordination of the public 
to business rule through the 1920s. This was 
so extreme that Congressional committees 
began to investigate it as we moved into the 

1930s. That's where a lot of our information 
about it comes from. 

Public relations is a huge industry. They're 
spending by now something on the order of a 
billion dollars a year. All along its commitment 
was to controlling the public mind. In the 

1930s, big problems arose again, as they had 
during the First World War. There was a huge 
depression and substantial labor organizing. In 
fact, in 1935 labor won its first major legisla- 
tive victory, namely, the right to organize, with 
the Wagner Act. That raised two serious prob- 



lems. For one thing, democracy was misfunc- 
tioning. The bewildered herd was actually win- 
ning legislative victories, and it's not supposed 
to work that way. The other problem was that 
itwasbecomingpossibleforpeopletoorganize. 
People have to be atomized and segregated and 
alone. They're not supposed to organize, 
becausethen they might be something beyond 
spectators of action. They might actually be 
participants if many people with limited 
resources could get together to enter the polit- 
ical arena. That's really threatening, A major 
response was taken on the part of business to 
ensure that this would be the last legislative 
victory for labor and that it would be the begin- 
ning of the end of this democratic deviation of 
popular organization. It worked. That was the 
last legislative victory for labor. From that 
point on — although the number of people in 
the unions increased for a while during the 
World War II, after which it started drop- 
ping — the capacity to act through the unions 
began to steadily drop. It wasn't by accident. 
We're now talking about the business com- 
munity, which spends lots and lots of money, 
attention, and thought into how to deal with 
these problems through the public relations 
industry and other organizations, like the 



National Association of Manufacturers and the 
Business Roundtable, and so on. They imme- 
diately set to work to try to find a way to 
counter these democratic deviations. 

The first trial was one year later, in 1937. 
There was a major strike, the Steel strike in 
western Pennsylvania at Johnstown. Business 
tried out a new technique oflabor destruction, 
which worked very well. Not through goon 
squads and breaking knees. That wasn't work- 
ing very well any more, but through the more 
subtle and effective means of propaganda. The 
idea was to figure out ways to turn the public 
against the strikers, to present the strikers as 
disruptive, harmful to the public and against 
the common interests. The common interests 
are those of "us," the businessman, the 
worker, the housewife. That's all "us." We 
want to be together and have things like har- 
mony and Americanism and working together. 
Then there's those bad strikers out there who 
are disruptive and causing trouble and break- 
ing harmony and violating Americanism. 
We've got to stop them so we can all live 
together. The corporate executive and the guy 
who cleans the floors all have the same inter- 
ests. We can all work together and work for 
Americanism in harmony, liking each other. 



That was essentially the message. A huge 
amount of effort was put into presenting it. 
This is, after all, the business community, so 
they control the media and have massive 
resources. And it wrked, very effectively. It 
was later called the "Mohawk Valley formula" 
and applied over and over again to break 
strikes. They were called "scientific methods 
of strike-breaking," and worked very effec- 
tively by mobilizing community opinion in 
favor of vapid, empty concepts like American- 
ism. Who can be against that? Or harmony. 
Who can be against that? Or, as in the Persian 
Gulf War, "Support our troops." Who can be 
against that? Or yellow ribbons. Who can be 
against that? Anything that's totally vacuous 
In fact, what does it mean if somebody 
asks you, Do you support the people in Iowa? 
Can you say, Yes, I support them, or No, I don't 
support them? It's not even a question. It does- 
n't mean anything. That's the point. The point 
of public relations slogans like "Support our 
troops" is that they don't mean anything. They 
mean as much as whether you support the peo- 
ple in Iowa. Of course, there was an issue. The 
issue was, Do you support our policy? But you 
don't want people to think about that issue. 
That's the whole point of good propaganda. 



You want to create a slogna that nobody's 
going to be against, and everybody's going to 
be for. Nobody knows what it means, because 
it doesn't mean anything. Its crucial value is 
that it diverts your attention from a question 
that does mean something: Do you support our 
policy? That's the one you're not allowed to 
talk about. So you have people arguing about 
support for the troops? "Of course I don't not 
support them." Then you've won. That's like 
Americanism and harmony. We're all 
together, empty slogans, let's join in, let's 
make sure we don't have these bad people 
around to disrupt our harmony with their talk 
about class struggle, rights and that sort of 
business. 

That's all very effective. It runs right up to 
today. And of course it is carefully thought out. 
The people in the public relations industry 
aren't there for the fun of it. They're doing 
work. They're trying to instill the right values. 
In fact, they have a conception of what democ- 
racy ought to be: It ought to be a system in 
which the specialized class is trained to work 
in the service of the masters, the people who 
own the society. The rest of the population 
ought to be deprived of any form of organiza- 
tion, because organization just causes trouble. 



They ought to be sitting alone in front of the 
TV and having drilled into their heads the mes- 
sage, which says, the only value in life is to 
have more commodities or live like that rich 
middle class family you're watching and to 
have nice values like harmony and American- 
ism. That's all there is in life. You may think 
in your own head that there's got to be some- 
thing more in life than this, but since you're 
watching the tube alone you assume, I must be 
crazy, because that's all that's going on over 
there. And since there is no organization per- 
mitted — that's absolutely crucial — you never 
have a way of finding out whether you are 
crazy, and you just assume it, because it's the 
natural thing to assume. 

So that's the ideal. Great efforts are made 
in trying to achieve that ideal. Obviously, 
there is a certain conception behind it. The 
conception of democracy is the one that I men- 
tioned. The bewildered herd is a problem. 
We've got to prevent their roar and trampling . 
We've got to distract them. They should be 
watching the Superbowl or sitcoms or violent 
movies. Every once in a while you call on 
them to chant meaningless slogans like "Sup- 
port our troops." You've got to keep them 
pretty scared, because unless they're properly 



scared and frightened of all kinds of devils that 
are going to destroy them from outside or 
inside or somewhere, they may start to think, 
which is very dangerous, because they're not 
competent to think. Therefore it's important 
to distract them and marginalize them. 

That's one conception of democracy. In 
fact, going back to the business community, 
the last legal victory for labor really was 1935, 
the Wagner Act. After the war came, the unions 
declined as did a very rich working class cul- 
ture that was associated with the unions. That 
was destroyed. We moved to a business-run 
society at a remarkable level. This is the only 
state -capitalist industrial society which does- 
n't have even the normal social contract that 
you find in comparable societies. Outside of 
South Africa, I guess, this is the only industrial 
society that doesn't have national health care. 
There's no general commitment to even min- 
imal standards of survival for the parts of the 
population who can't follow those rules and 
gain things for themselves individually. 
Unions are virtually nonexistent. Other forms 
of popular structure are virtually nonexistent. 
There are no political parties or organizations. 
It's a long way toward the ideal, at least struc- 
turally. The media are a corporate monopoly. 



They have the same point of view. The two par- 
ties are two factions of the business party. Most 
of the population doesn't even bother voting 
because it looks meaningless. They're mar- 
ginalized and properly distracted. At least that's 
the goal. The leading figure in the public rela- 
tions industry, Edward Bernays, actually came 
out of the Creel Commission. He was part of 
it, learned his lessons there and went on to 
develop what he called the "engineering of con- 
sent," which he described as "the essence of 
democracy." The people who are able to engi- 
neer consent are the ones who have the 
resources and the power to do it — the business 
community — and that's who you work for. 



ENGINEERING OPINION 

It is also necessary to whip up the population 
in support of foreign adventures. Usually the 
population is pacifist, just like they were dur- 
ing the First World War. The public sees no rea- 
son to get involved in foreign adventures, 
killing, and torture. So you have to whip them 
up. And to whip them up you have to frighten 
them. Bernays himself had an important 
achievement in this respect. He was the per- 
son who ran the public relations campaign for 
the United Fruit Company in 1954, when the 
United States moved in to overthrow the cap- 
italist-democratic government of Guatemala 
and installed a murderous death-squad society, 
which remains that way to the present day 
with constant infusions of U.S. aid to prevent 
in more than empty form democratic devia- 
tions. It's necessary to constantly ram through 
domestic programs which the public is 
opposed to, because there is no reason for the 
public to be in favor of domestic programs that 
are harmful to them. This, too, takes extensive 
propaganda. We've seen a lot of this in the last 
ten years. The Reagan programs were over- 



whelmingly unpopular. Voters in the 1984 
"Reagan landslide," by about three to two, 
hoped that his policies would not be enacted. 
If you take particular programs, like arma- 
ments, cutting back on social spending, etc., 
almost every one of them was overwhelmingly 
opposed by the public. But as long as people are 
marginalized and distracted and have no way 
to organize or articulate their sentiments, or 
even know that others have these sentiments, 
people who said that they prefer social spend- 
ing to military spending, who gave that answer 
on polls, as people overwhelmingly did, 
assumed that they were the only people with 
that crazy idea in their heads. They never heard 
it from anywhere else. Nobody's supposed to 
think that. Therefore, if you do think it and you 
answer it in apoll, you just assume that you're 
sort of weird. Since there's no way to get 
together with other people who share or rein- 
force that view and help you articulate it, you 
feel like an oddity, an oddball. So you just stay 
on the side and you don't pay any attention to 
what's going on. You look at something else, 
like the Superbowl. 

To a certain extent, then, that ideal was 
achieved, but never completely. There are insti- 
tutions which it has as yet been impossible to 



destroy. The churches, for example, still exist. 
A large part of the dissident activity in the 
United States comes out of the churches, for 
the simple reason that they're there. So when 
you go to a European country and give a polit- 
ical talk, it may very likely be in the union hall. 
Here that won't happen, because unions first 
of all barely exist, and if they do exist they're 
not political organizations. But the churches do 
exist, and therefore you often give a talk in a 
church. Central American solidarity work 
mostly grew out of the churches, mainly 
because they exist. 

The bewildered herd never gets properly 
tamed, so this is a constant battle. In the 1930s 
they arose again and were put down. In the 
1960s there was another wave of dissidence. 
There was a name for that. It was called by the 
specialized class "the crisis of democracy." 
Democracy was regarded as entering into a cri- 
sis in the 1960s. The crisis was that large seg- 
ments of the population were becoming 
organized and active and trying to participate 
in the political arena. Here we come back to 
these two conceptions of democracy. By the 
dictionary definition, that's an advance in 
democracy. By the prevailing conception that's 
a problem, a crisis that has to be overcome. The 



population has to be driven back to the apathy, 
obedience and passivity that is their proper 
■state. We therefore have to do something to 
overcome the crisis. Efforts were made to 
achieve that. It hasn't worked. The crisis of 
democracy is still alive and well, fortunately, 
but not very effective in changing policy. But 
it is effective in changing opinion, contrary to 
what a lot of people believe. Great efforts were 
made after the 1960s to try to reverse and over- 
come this malady. One aspect of the malady 
actually got a technical name. It was called the 
"Vietnam Syndrome." The Vietnam Syn- 
drome, a term that began to come up around 
1970, has actually been defined on occasion. 
The Reaganite intellectual Norman Podhoretz 
defined it as "the sickly inhibitions against the 
use of military force." There were these sickly 
inhibitions against violence on the part of a 
large part of the public. People just didn't 
understand why we should go around torturing 
people and killing people and carpet bombing 
them. It's very dangerous for a population to be 
overcome by these sickly inhibitions, as 
Goebbels understood, because then there's a 
limit on foreign adventures. It's necessary, as 
the Washington Post put it rather proudly dur- 
ing the Gulf War hysteria, to instill in people 



respect for "martial value." That's important. 
If you want to have a violent society that uses 
force around the world to achieve the ends of 
its own domestic elite, it's necessary to have 
a proper appreciation of the martial virtues and 
none of these sickly inhibitions about using 
violence. So that's the Vietnam Syndrome. It's 
necessary to overcome that one. 



REPRESENTATION AS REALITY 



It's also necessary to completely falsify history. 
That's another way to overcome these sickly 
inhibitions, to make it look as if when we 
attack and destroy somebody we're really pro- 
tecting and defending ourselves against major 
aggressors and monsters and so on. There has 
been a huge effort since the Vietnam war to 
reconstruct the history of that. Too many peo- 
ple began to understand what was really going 
on. Including plenty of soldiers and a lot of 
young people who were involved with the peace 
movement and others. That was bad. It was nec- 
essary to rearrange those bad thoughts and to 
restore some form of sanity, namely, a recog- 
nition that whatever we do is noble and right. 
If we're bombing South Vietnam, that's because 
we're defending South Vietnam against some- 
body, namely, the South Vietnamese, since 
nobody else was there. It's what the Kennedy 
intellectuals called defense against "internal 
aggression" in South Vietnam. That was the 
phrase used by Adlai Stevenson and others. It 
was necessary to make that the official and well 
understood picture. That's worked pretty well. 



When you have total control over the media and 
the educational system and scholarship is con- 
formist, you can get that across. One indication 
of it was revealed in a study done at the Uni- 
versity of Massachusetts on attitudes toward 
the current Gulf crisis — a study of beliefs and 
attitudes in television watching. One of the 
questions asked in that study was, How many 
Vietnamese casualties would you estimate 
that there were during the Vietnam war? The 
average response on the part of Americans today 
is about 1 00,000. The official figure is about two 
million. The actual figure is probably three to 
four million. The people who conducted the 
study raised an appropriate question: What 
would we think about German political culture 
if, when you asked people today how many Jews 
died in the Holocaust, they estimated about 
300,000? What would that tell us about German 
political culture? They leave the question 
unanswered, but you can pursue it. What does 
it tell us about our culture? It tells us quite a 
bit. It is necessary to overcome the sickly inhi- 
bitions against the use of military force and 
other democratic deviations. In this particular 
case it worked. This is true on every topic. Pick 
the topic you like: the Middle East, interna- 
tional terrorism, Central America, whatever it 



is — the picture of the world that's presented to 
the public has only the remotest relation to 
reality. The truth of the matter is buried under 
edifice after edifice of lies upon lies. It's all been 
a marvelous success from the point of view in 
deterring the threat of democracy, achieved 
under conditions of freedom, which is 
extremely interesting. It's not like a totalitar- 
ian state, where it's done by force. These 
achievements are under conditions of freedom. 
If we want to understand our own society, we'll 
have to think about these facts. They are impor- 
tant facts, important for those who care about 
what kind of society they live in. 



DISSIDENT CULTURE 



Despite all of this, the dissident culture sur- 
vived. It's grown quite a lot since the 1960s. In 
the 1960s the dissident culture first of all was 
extremely slow in developing. There was no 
protest against the Indochina war until years 
after the United States had started bombing 
South Vietnam. When it did grow it was a very 
narrow dissident movement, mostly students 
and young people. By the 1970s that had 
changed considerably. Major popular move- 
ments had developed: the environmental 
movement, the feminist movement, the anti- 
nuclear movement, and others. In the 1980s 
there was an even greater expansion to the sol- 
idarity movements, which is something very 
new and important in the history of at least 
American, and maybe even world dissidence. 
These were movements that not only 
protested but actually involved themselves, 
often intimately, in the lives of suffering peo- 
ple elsewhere. They learned a great deal from 
it and had quite a civilizing effect on main- 
stream America. All of this has made a very 
large difference. Anyone who has been 
involved in this kind of activity for many years 



must be aware of this. I know myself that the 
kind of talks I give today in the most reac- 
tionary parts of the country — central Georgia, 
rural Kentucky, etc. — are talks of the kind that 
I couldn't have given at the peak of the peace 
movement to the most active peace movement 
audience. Now you can give them anywhere. 
People may agree or not agree, but at least they 
understand what you're talking about and 
there's some sort of common ground that you 
can pursue. 

These are all signs of the civilizing effect, 
despite all the propaganda, despite all the 
efforts to control thought and manufacture 
consent. Nevertheless, people are acquiring an 
ability and a willingness to think things 
through. Skepticism about power has grown, 
and attitudes have changed on many, many 
issues. It's kind of slow, maybe even glacial, 
but perceptible and important. Whether it's 
fast enough to make a significant difference in 
what happens in the world is another question. 
Just to take one familiar example of it: The 
famous gender gap. In the 1960s attitudes of 
men and women were approximately the 
same on such matters as the "martial virtues" 
and the sickly inhibitions against the use of 
military force. Nobody, neither men nor 



women, were suffering from those sickly 
inhibitions in the early 1960s. The responses 
were the same. Everybody thought that the use 
of violence to suppress people out there was 
just right. Over the years it's changed. The 
sickly inhibitions have increased all across the 
board. But meanwhile a gap has been growing, 
and by now it's a very substantial gap. Accord- 
ing to polls, it's something like twenty-five 
percent. What has happened? What has hap- 
pened is that there is some form of at least 
semi-organized popular movement that 
women are involved in — the feminist move- 
ment. Organization has its effects. It means 
that you discover that you're not alone. Oth- 
ers have the same thoughts that you do. You 
can reinforce your thoughts and learn more 
about what you think and believe. These are 
very informal movements, not like a mem- 
bership organizations, just a mood that 
involves interactions among people. It has a 
very noticeable effect. That's the danger of 
democracy: If organizations can develop, if 
people are no longer just glued to the tube, you 
may have all these funny thoughts arising in 
their heads, like sickly inhibitions against the 
use of military force. That has to be overcome, 
but it hasn't been overcome. 



PARADE OF ENEMIES 



Instead of talking about the last war, let me 
talk about the next war, because sometimes it's 
useful to be prepared instead of just reacting. 
There is a very characteristic development 
going on in the United States now. It's not the 
first country in the world that's done this. 
There are growing domestic social and eco- 
nomic problems, in fact, maybe catastrophes. 
Nobody in power has any intention of doing 
anything about them. If you look at the 
domestic programs of the administrations of 
the past ten years — I include here the Democ- 
ratic opposition — there's really no serious pro- 
posal about what to do about the severe 
problems of health, education, homelessness, 
joblessness, crime, soaring criminal popula- 
tions, jails, deterioration in the inner cities — 
the whole raft of problems. You all know about 
them, and they're all getting worse. Just in the 
two years that George Bush has been in office 
three million more children crossed the 
poverty line, the debt is zooming, educational 
standards are declining, real wages are now 
back to the level of about the late 1950s for 
much of the population, and nobody's doing 



anything about it. In such circumstances 
you've got to divert the bewildered herd, 
because if they start noticing this they may not 
like it, since they're the ones suffering from it. 
Just having them watch the Superbowl and the 
sitcoms may not be enough. You have to whip 
them up into fear of enemies. In the 1930s 
Hitler whipped them into fear of the Jews and 
gypsies. You had to crush them to defend your- 
selves. We have our ways, too. Over the last ten 
years, every year or two, some major monster 
is constructed that we have to defend ourselves 
against. There used to be one that was always 
readily available: The Russians. You could 
always defend yourself against the Russians. 
But they're losing their attractiveness as an 
enemy, and it's getting harder and harder to use 
that one, so some new ones have to be conjured 
up. In fact, people have quite unfairly criticized 
George Bush for being unable to express or 
articulate what's really driving us now. That's 
very unfair. Prior to about the mid-1980s, when 
you were asleep you would just play the record: 
the Russians are coming. But he lost that one 
and he's got to make up new ones, just like the 
Reaganite public relations apparatus did in the 
1980s. So it was international terrorists and 
narco-traffickers and crazed Arabs and Saddam 



Hussein, the new Hitler, was going to conquer 
the world. They've got to keep coming up one 
after another. You frighten the population, ter- 
rorize them, intimidate them so that they're 
too afraid to travel and cower in fear. Then you 
have a magnificent victory over Grenada, 
Panama, or some other defenseless third- 
world army that you can pulverize before you 
ever bother to look at them — which is just 
what happened. That gives relief. We were 
saved at the last minute. That's one of the ways 
in which you can keep the bewildered herd 
from paying attention to what's really going on 
around them, keep them diverted and con- 
trolled. The next one that's coming along, most 
likely, will be Cuba. That's going to require a 
continuation of the illegal economic warfare, 
possibly a revival of the extraordinary inter- 
national terrorism. The most major interna- 
tional terrorism organized yet has been the 
Kennedy administration's Operation Mon- 
goose, then the things that followed along, 
against Cuba. There's been nothing remotely 
comparable to it except perhaps the war 
against Nicaragua, if you call that terrorism. 
The World Court classified it as something 
more like aggression. There's always an ideo- 
logical offensive that builds up a chimerical 



monster, then campaigns to have it crushed. 
You can't go in if they can fight back. That's 
much too dangerous. But if you are sure that 
they will be crushed, maybe we'll knock that 
one off and heave another sigh of relief. 



SELECTIVE PERCEPTION 



This has been going on for quite a while. In 
May 1986, the memoirs of the released Cuban 
prisoner, Armando Valladares, came out. They 
quickly became a media sensation. I'll give you 
a couple of quotes. The media described his 
revelations as "the definitive account of the 
vast system of torture and prison by which Cas- 
tro punishes and obliterates political opposi- 
tion." It was "an inspiring and unforgettable 
account" of the "bestial prisons," inhuman tor- 
ture, [and] record of state violence [under] yet 
another of this century's mass murderers, who 
we learn, at last, from this book "has created 
a new despotism that has institutionalized tor- 
ture as a mechanism of social control" in "the 
hell that was the Cuba that [Valladares] lived 
in." That's the Washington Post and New York 
Times in repeated reviews. Castro was 
described as "a dictatorial goon." His atrocities 
were revealed in this book so conclusively that 
"only the most light-headed and cold-blooded 
Western intellectual will come to the tyrant's 
defense," said the Washington Post. Remem- 
ber, this is the account of what happened to one 
man. Let's say it's all true. Let's raise no ques- 



tions about what happened to the one man who 
says he was tortured. At a White House cere- 
mony marking Human Rights Day, he was sin- 
gled out by Ronald Reagan for his courage in 
enduring the horrors and sadism of this bloody 
Cuban tyrant. He was then appointed the U.S. 
representative at the U.N. Human Rights 
Commission, where he has been able to per- 
form signal services defending the Salvadoran 
and Guatemalan governments against charges 
that they conduct atrocities so massive that 
they make anything he suffered look pretty 
minor. That's the way things stand. 

That was May 1986. It was interesting, and 
it tells you something about the manufacture 
of consent. The same month, the surviving 
members of the Human Rights Group of El Sal- 
vador — the leaders had been killed — were 
arrested and tortured, including Herbert Anaya, 
who was the director. They were sent to a 
prison — LaEsperanza (hope) Prison. While they 
were in prison they continued their human 
rights work. They were lawyers, they continued 
taking affidavits. There were 432 prisoners in 
that prison. They got signed affidavits from 430 
of them in which they described, under oath, 
the torture that they had received: electrical tor- 
ture and other atrocities, including, in one case, 



torture by a North American U.S. major in uni- 
form, who is described in some detail. This is 
an unusually explicit and comprehensive tes- 
timony, probably unique in its detail about 
what's going on in a torture chamber. This 
160-page report of the prisoners' sworn testi- 
mony was sneaked out of prison, along with a 
videotape which was taken showing people tes- 
tifying in prison about their torture. It was dis- 
tributed by the Marin County Interfaith Task 
Force. The national press refused to cover it. 
The TV stations refused to run it. There was an 
article in the local Marin County newspaper, 
the San Francisco Examiner, and I think that's 
all. No one else would touch it. This was a time 
when there was more than a few "light-headed 
and cold-blooded Western intellectuals" who 
were singing the praises of Jose Napoleon 
Duarte and of Ronald Reagan. Anaya was not 
the subject of any tributes. He didn't get on 
Human Rights Day. He wasn't appointed to 
anything. He was released in a prisoner 
exchange and then assassinated, apparently by 
the U.S. -backed security forces. Very little infor- 
mation about that ever appeared. The media 
never asked whether exposure of the atroci- 
ties — instead of sitting on them and silencing 
them — might have saved his life. 



This tells you something about the way a 
well-functioning system of consent manufac- 
turing works. In comparison with the revela- 
tions of Herbert Anaya in El Salvador, 
Valladares's memoirs are not even a pea next 
to the mountain. But you've got your job to do. 
That takes us toward the next war. I expect, 
we're going to hear more and more of this, until 
the next operation takes place. 

A few remarks about the last one. Let's 
turn finally to that. Let me begin with this Uni- 
versity of Massachusetts study that I men- 
tioned before. It has some interesting 
conclusions. In the study people were asked 
whether they thought that the United States 
should intervene with force to reverse illegal 
occupation or serious human rights abuses. By 
about two to one, people in the United States 
thought we should. We should use force in the 
case of illegal occupation of land and severe 
human rights abuses. If the United States was 
to follow that advice, we would bomb El Sal- 
vador, Guatemala, Indonesia, Damascus, Tel 
Aviv, Capetown, Turkey, Washington, and a 
whole list of other states. These are all cases 
of illegal occupation and aggression and severe 
human rights abuses. If you know the facts 
about that range of examples, you'll know very 



well that Saddam Hussein's aggression and 
atrocities fall well within the range. They're 
not the most extreme. Why doesn't anybody 
come to that conclusion? The reason is that 
nobody knows. In a well-functioning propa- 
ganda system, nobody would know what I'm 
talking about when I list that range of exam- 
ples. If you bother to look, you find that those 
examples are quite appropriate. 

Take one that was ominously close to being 
perceived during the Gulf War. In February, 
right in the middle of the bombing campaign, 
the government of Lebanon requested Israel to 
observe U.N. Security Council Resolution 
425, which called on it to withdraw immedi- 
ately and unconditionally from Lebanon. That 
resolution dates from March 1978. There have 
since been two subsequent resolutions calling 
for the immediate and unconditional with- 
drawal of Israel from Lebanon. Of course it 
doesn't observe them because the United 
States backs it in maintaining that occupation. 
Meanwhile southern Lebanon is terrorized. 
There are big torture-chambers with horrifying 
things going on. It's used as a base for attack- 
ing other parts of Lebanon. Since 1978, 
Lebanon was invaded, the city of Beirut was 
bombed, about 20,000 people were killed, about 



80 percent of them civilians, hospitals were 
destroyed, and more terror, looting, and robbery 
was inflicted. All fine, the United States 
backed it. That's just one case. You didn't see 
anything in the media about it or any discus- 
sion about whether Israel and the United States 
should observe U.N. Security Council Resolu- 
tion 425 or any of the other resolutions, nor did 
anyone call for the bombing of Tel Aviv, 
although by the principles upheld by two-thirds 
of the population, we should. After all, that's 
illegal occupation and severe human rights 
abuses. That's just one case. There are much 
worse ones. The Indonesian invasion of East 
Timor knocked off about 200,000 people. They 
all look minor by that one. That was strongly 
backed by the United States and is still going 
on with major United States diplomatic and 
military support. We can go on and on. 



THE GULF WAR 



That tells you how a well-functioning propa- 
ganda system works. People can believe that 
when we use force against Iraq and Kuwait it's 
because we really observe the principle that 
illegal occupation and human rights abuses 
should be met by force. They don't see what it 
would mean if those principles were applied to 
U.S. behavior. That's a success of propaganda 
of quite a spectacular type. 

Let's take a look at another case. If you look 
closely at the coverage of the war since August 
(1990), you'll notice that there are a couple of 
striking voices missing. For example, there is 
an Iraqi democratic opposition, in fact, a very 
courageous and quite substantial Iraqi democ- 
ratic opposition. They, of course, function in 
exile because they couldn't survive in Iraq. 
They are in Europe primarily. They are 
bankers, engineers, architects — people like 
that. They are articulate, they have voices, and 
they speak. The previous February, when Sad- 
dam Hussein was still George Bush's favorite 
friend and trading partner, they actually came 
to Washington, according to Iraqi democratic 
opposition sources, with a plea for some kind 



of support for a demand of theirs calling for a 
parliamentary democracy in Iraq. They were 
totally rebuffed, because the United States had 
no interest in it. There was no reaction to this 
in the public record. 

Since August it became a little harder to 
ignore their existence. In August we suddenly 
turned against Saddam Hussein after having 
favored him for many years. Here was an Iraqi 
democratic opposition who ought to have some 
thoughts about the matter. They would be 
happy to see Saddam Hussein drawn and quar- 
tered. He killed their brothers, tortured their 
sisters, and drove them out of the country. 
They have been fighting against his tyranny 
throughout the whole time that Ronald Reagan 
and George Bush were cherishing him. What 
about their voices? Take a look at the national 
media and see how much you can find about 
the Iraqi democratic opposition from August 
through March (1991). You can't find a word. 
It's not that they're inarticulate. They have 
statements, proposals, calls and demands. If 
you look at them, you find that they're indis- 
tinguishable from those of the American peace 
movement. They're against Saddam Hussein 
and they're against the war against Iraq. They 
don't want their country destroyed. What they 



want is a peaceful resolution, and they knew 
perfectly well that it might have been achiev- 
able. That's the wrong view and therefore 
they're out. We don't hear a word about the 
Iraqi democratic opposition. If you want to find 
out about them, pick up the German press, or 
the British press. They don't say much about 
them, but they're less controlled than we are 
and they say something. 

This is a spectacular achievement of pro- 
paganda. First, that the voices of the Iraqi 
democrats are completely excluded, and sec- 
ond, that nobody notices it. That's interesting, 
too. It takes a really deeply indoctrinated pop- 
ulation not to notice that we're not hearing the 
voices of the Iraqi democratic opposition and 
not asking the question, Why? and finding out 
the obvious answer: because the Iraqi democ- 
rats have their own thoughts; they agree with 
the international peace movement and there- 
fore they're out. 

Let's take the question of the reasons for 
the war. Reasons were offered for the war. The 
reasons are: aggressors cannot be rewarded and 
aggression must be reversed by the quick resort 
to violence; that was the reason for the war. 
There was basically no other reason advanced. 
Can that possibly be the reason for the war? 



Does the United States uphold those principles, 
that aggressors cannot be rewarded and that 
aggression must be reversed by a quick resort 
to violence? I won't insult your intelligence by 
running through the facts, but the fact is those 
arguments could be refuted in two minutes by 
a literate teenager. However, they never were 
refuted. Take a look at the media, the liberal 
commentators and critics, the people who 
testified in Congress and see whether anybody 
questioned the assumption that the United 
States stands up to those principles. Has the 
United States opposed its own aggression in 
Panama and insisted on bombing Washington 
to reverse it? When the South African occupa- 
tion of Namibia was declared illegal in 1969, 
did the United States impose sanctions on food 
and medicine? Did it go to war? Did it bomb 
Capetown? No, it carried out twenty years of 
"quiet diplomacy." It wasn't very pretty dur- 
ing those twenty years. In the years of the Rea- 
gan-Bush administration alone, about 1.5 
million people were killed by S outh Afric a j u st 
in the surrounding countries. Forget what was 
happening in South Africa and Namibia. Some- 
how that didn't sear our sensitive souls. We 
continued with "quite diplomacy" and ended 
up with ample reward for the aggressors. They 



were given the major port in Namibia and 
plenty of advantages that took into account 
their security concerns. Where is this princi- 
ple that we uphold? Again, it's child's play to 
demonstrate that those couldn't possibly have 
been the reasons for going to war, because we 
don't uphold these principles. But nobody did 
it — that's what's important. And nobody both- 
ered to point out the conclusion that follows: 
No reason was given for going to war. None. 
No reason was given for going to war that could 
not be refuted by a literate teenager in about 
two minutes. That again is the hallmark of a 
totalitarian culture. It ought to frighten us, that 
we are so deeply totalitarian that we can be dri- 
ven to war without any reason being given for 
it and without anybody noticing Lebanon's 
request or caring. It's a very striking fact. 

Right before the bombing started, in mid- 
January, a major Washington Post- ABC poll 
revealed something interesting. People were 
asked, If Iraq would agree to withdraw from 
Kuwait in return for Security Council consid- 
eration of the problem of Arab-Israeli conflict, 
would you be in favor of that? By about two-to- 
one, the population was in favor of that. So was 
the whole world, including the Iraqi democra- 
tic opposition. So it was reported that two- 



thirds of the American population were in favor 
of that. Presumably, the people who were in 
favor of that thought they were the only ones 
in the world to think so. Certainly nobody in 
the press had said that it would be a good idea. 
The orders from Washington have been, we're 
supposed to be against "linkage," that is, 
diplomacy, and therefore everybody goose- 
stepped on command and everybody was 
against diplomacy. Try to find commentary in 
the press — you can find a column by Alex Cock- 
burn in the Los Angeles Times, who argued that 
it would be a good idea. The people who were 
answering that question thought, I'm alone, but 
that's what I think. Suppose they knew that 
they weren't alone, that other people thought 
it, like the Iraqi democratic opposition. Suppose 
that they knew that this was not hypothetical, 
that in fact Iraq had made exactly such an offer. 
It had been released by high U.S. officials just 
eight days earlier. On January 2, these officials 
had released an Iraqi offer to withdraw totally 
from Kuwait in return for consideration by the 
Security Council of the Arab-Israeli conflict and 
the problem of weapons of mass destruction. 
The United States had been refusing to negoti- 
ate this issue since well before the invasion of 
Kuwait. Suppose that people had known that 



the offer was actually on the table and that it 
was widely supported and that in fact it's 
exactly the kind of thing that any rational per- 
son would do if they were interested in peace, 
as we do in other cases, in the rare cases that 
we do want to reverse aggression. Suppose that 
it had been known. You can make your own 
guesses, but I would assume that the two-thirds 
would probably have risen to 98 percent of the 
population. Here you have the great successes 
of propaganda. Probably not one person who 
answered the poll knew any of the things I've 
just mentioned. The people thought they were 
alone. Therefore it was possible to proceed with 
the war policy without opposition. 

There was a good deal of discussion about 
whether sanctions would work. You had the 
head of the CIA come up and discuss whether 
sanctions would work. However, there was no 
discussion of a much more obvious question: 
Had sanctions already worked? The answer is 
yes, apparently they had — probably by late 
August, very likely by late December. It was 
very hard to think up any other reason for the 
Iraqi offers of withdrawal, which were authen- 
ticated or in some cases released by high U.S. 
officials, who described them as "serious" and 
"negotiable." So the real question is: Had sane- 



tions already worked? Was there a way out? 
Was there a way out in terms quite acceptable 
to the general population, the world at large 
and the Iraqi democratic opposition? These 
questions were not discussed, and it's crucial 
for a well-functioning propaganda system that 
they not be discussed. That enables the chair- 
man of the Republican National Committee to 
say that if any Democrat had been in office, 
Kuwait would not be liberated today. He can 
say that and no Democrat would get up and say 
that if I were president it would have been lib- 
erated not only today but six months ago, 
because there were opportunities then that I 
would have pursued and Kuwait would have 
been liberated without killing tens of thou- 
sands of people and without causing an envi- 
ronmental catastrophe. No Democrat would 
say that because no Democrat took that posi- 
tion. Henry Gonzalez and Barbara Boxer took 
that position. But the number of people who 
took it is so marginal that it's virtually nonex- 
istent. Given the fact that almost no Democ- 
ratic politician would say that, Clayton 
Yeutter is free to make his statements. 

When Scud missiles hit Israel, nobody in 
the press applauded. Again, that's an interest- 
ing fact about a well-functioning propaganda 



system. We might ask, why not? After all, Sad- 
dam Hussein's arguments were as good as 
George Bush's arguments. What were they, 
after all? Let's just take Lebanon. Saddam Hus- 
sein says that he can't stand annexation. He 
can't let Israel annex the Syrian Golan Heights 
and East Jerusalem, in opposition to the unan- 
imous agreement of the Security Council. He 
can't stand annexation. He can't stand aggres- 
sion. Israel has been occupying southern 
Lebanon since 1978 in violation of Security 
Council resolutions that it refuses to abide by. 
In the course of that period it attacked all of 
Lebanon, still bombs most of Lebanon at will. 
He can't stand it. He might have read the 
Amnesty International report on Israeli atroc- 
ities in the West Bank. His heart is bleeding. 
He can't stand it. Sanctions can't work because 
the United States vetoes them. Negotiations 
won't work because the United States blocks 
them. What's left but force? He's been waiting 
for years. Thirteen years in the case of 
Lebanon, 20 years in the case of the West Bank. 
You've heard that argument before. The only 
difference between that argument and the one 
you heard is that Saddam Hussein could truly 
say sanctions and negotiations can't work 
because the United States blocks them. But 



George Bush couldn't say that, because sanc- 
tions apparently had worked, and there was 
every reason to believe that negotiations could 
work — except that he adamantly refused to 
pursue them, saying explicitly, there will be no 
negotiations right through. Did you find any- 
body in the press who pointed that out? No. It's 
a triviality. It's something that, again, a liter- 
ate teenager could figure out in a minute. But 
nobody pointed it out, no commentator, no edi- 
torial writer. That, again, is the sign of a very 
well-run totalitarian culture. It shows that the 
manufacture of consent is working. 

Last comment about this. We could give 
many examples, you could make them up as 
you go along. Take the idea that Saddam Hus- 
sein is a monster about to conquer the world — 
widely believed, in the United States, and not 
unrealistically. It was drilled into people's 
heads over and over again: He's about to take 
everything. We've got to stop him now. How 
did he get that powerful? This is a small, third- 
world country without an industrial base. For 
eight years Iraq had been fighting Iran. That's 
post-revolutionary Iran, which had decimated 
its officer corps and most of its military force. 
Iraq had a little bit of support in that war. It was 
backed by the Soviet Union, the United States, 



Europe, the major Arab countries, and the Arab 
oil producers. It couldn't defeat Iran. But all of 
a sudden it's ready to conquer the world. Did 
you find anybody who pointed that out? The 
fact of the matter is, this was a third-world 
country with a peasant army. It is now being 
conceded that there was a ton of disinforma- 
tion about the fortifications, the chemical 
weapons, etc. But did you find anybody who 
pointedit out? No. You found virtually nobody 
who pointed it out. That's typical. Notice that 
this was done one year after exactly the same 
thing was done with Manuel Noriega. Manuel 
Noriega is a minor thug by comparison with 
George Bush's friend Saddam Hussein or 
George Bush's other friends in Beijing or 
George Bush himself, for that matter. In com- 
parison with them, Manuel Noriega is a pretty 
minor thug. Bad, but not a world-class thug of 
the kind we like. He was turned into a creature 
larger than life. He was going to destroy us, 
leading the narco-traffickers. We had to 
quickly move in and smash him, killing a cou- 
ple hundred or maybe thousand people, restor- 
ing to power the tiny, maybe eight percent 
white oligarchy, and putting U.S. military 
officers in control at every level of the politi- 
cal system. We had to do all those things 



because, after all, we had to save ourselves or 
we were going to be destroyed by this monster. 
One year later the same thing was done by Sad- 
dam Hussein. Did anybody point it out? Did 
anybody point out what had happened or why? 
You'll have to look pretty hard for that. 

Notice that this is not all that different 
from what the Creel Commission when it 
turned a pacifistic population into raving hys- 
terics who wanted to destroy everything Ger- 
man to save ourselves from Huns who were 
tearing the arms off Belgian babies. The tech- 
niques are maybe more sophisticated, with 
television and lots of money going into it, but 
it's pretty traditional. 

I think the issue, to come back to my orig- 
inal comment, is not simply disinformation 
and the Gulf crisis. The issue is much broader. 
It's whether we want to live in a free society 
or whether we want to live under what 
amounts to a form of self-imposed totalitari- 
anism, with the bewildered herd marginalized, 
directed elsewhere, terrified, screaming patri- 
otic slogans, fearing for their lives and admir- 
ing with awe the leader who saved them from 
destruction, while the educated masses goose- 
step on command and repeat the slogans 
they're supposed to repeat and the society dete- 



riorates at home. We end up serving as a mer- 
cenary enforcer state, hoping that others are 
going to pay us to smash up the world. Those 
are the choices. That's the choice that you have 
to face. The answer to those questions is very 
much in the hands of people like you and me. 



