MICHEL FOUCAULT 

A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason 














Also by Michel Foucault 


The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences 
The Archaeology of Knowledge (and The Discourse on 

Language) 

The Birth of the Clinic: An Archaeology of Medical Perception 
I, Pierre Riviere, having slaughtered my mother, my sister, and 
my brother.... A Case of Parricide in the Nineteenth Century 
Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison 
The History of Sexuality, Volumes 1, 2 and 3 
Herculine Barbin, Being the Recently Discovered Memoirs of a 
Nineteenth-Century French Hermaphrodite 
Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings, 

1972-1977 

The Foucault Reader (edited by Paul Rabinow) 


2 



<MJD^(ess 

AND 

CIVILIZATION 

Jl History of Insanity in the 
*Age of Reason 


MICHEL 

FOUCAULT 



Translatedfrom the French by 

RICHARD HOWARD 

0 

Vintage Books 

A DIVISION OF RANDOM HOUSE 

New ibrk 


3 




VINTAGE BOOKS EDITION, NOVEMBER 1988 

Copyright © 1965 by Random House, Inc. 

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American 
Copyright Conventions. Published in the United States by 
Random House, Inc., New York, and simultaneously in Canada 
by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto. Originally 
published in the United States by Pantheon Books, in 1965, and 
in France as Histoire de la Folie © 1961, by Librairie Plon. This 
translation is of the edition abridged by the author and published 
in the Plon 10/18 series. However, the author has added some 
additional material from the original edition, including the 
chapter “Passion and Delirium.” 

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Fata 

Foucault, Michel. 

Madness and civilization. 

Translation of Folie et deraison; histoire de la folie. 

Includes bibliographical references. 

1. Psychiatry—History. 2. Mental illness. 

I. Title. 

RC438.F613 1973 '157’.2'09033 72-10582 

elSBN: 978-0-307-83310-5 

v3.1 


4 



INTRODUCTION 


MICHEL FOUCAULT has achieved something truly creative 
in this book on the history of madness during the so-called 
classical age: the end of the sixteenth and the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries. Rather than to review historically the 
concept of madness, the author has chosen to re-create, mostly 
from original documents, mental illness, folly, and unreason as 
they must have existed in their time, place, and proper social 
perspective. In a sense, he has tried to re-create the negative part 
of the concept, that which has disappeared under the retroactive 
influence of present-day ideas and the passage of time. Too 
many historical books about psychic disorders look at the past in 
the light of the present; they single out only what has positive 
and direct relevance to present-day psychiatry. This book 
belongs to the few which demonstrate how skillful, sensitive 
scholarship uses history to enrich, deepen, and reveal new 
avenues for thought and investigation. 

No oversimplifications, no black-and-white statements, no 
sweeping generalizations are ever allowed in this book; folly is 
brought back to life as a complex social phenomenon, part and 
parcel of the human condition. Most of the time, for the sake of 
clarity, we examine madness through one of its facets; as M. 
Foucault animates one facet of the problem after the other, he 
always keeps them related to each other. The end of the Middle 
Ages emphasized the comic, but just as often the tragic aspect of 
madness, as in Tristan and Iseult , for example. The Renaissance, 
with Erasmus’s Praise of Folly , demonstrated how fascinating 
imagination and some of its vagaries were to the thinkers of that 
day. The French Revolution, Pinel, and Tuke emphasized 
political, legal, medical, or religious aspects of madness; and 
today, our so-called objective medical approach, in spite of the 


5 



benefits that it has brought to the mentally ill, continues to look 
at only one side of the picture. Folly is so human that it has 
common roots with poetry and tragedy; it is revealed as much in 
the insane asylum as in the writings of a Cervantes or a 
Shakespeare, or in the deep psychological insights and cries of 
revolt of a Nietzsche. Correctly or incorrectly, the author feels 
that Freud’s death instinct also stems from the tragic elements 
which led men of all epochs to worship, laugh at, and dread folly 
simultaneously. Fascinating as Renaissance men found it—they 
painted it, praised it, sang about it—it also heralded for them 
death of the body by picturing death of the mind. 

Nothing is more illuminating than to follow with M. Foucault 
the many threads which are woven in this complex book, 
whether it speaks of changing symptoms, commitment 
procedures, or treatment. For example: he sees a definite 
connection between some of the attitudes toward madness and 
the disappearance, between 1200 and 1400, of leprosy. In the 
middle of the twelfth century, France had more than 2,000 
leprosariums, and England and Scotland 220 for a population of 
a million and a half people. As leprosy vanished, in part because 
of segregation, a void was created and the moral values attached 
to the leper had to find another scapegoat. Mental illness and 
unreason attracted that stigma to themselves, but even this was 
neither complete, simple, nor immediate. 

Renaissance men developed a delightful, yet horrible way of 
dealing with their mad denizens: they were put on a ship and 
entrusted to mariners because folly, water, and sea, as everyone 
then “knew,” had an affinity for each other. Thus, “Ships of 
Fools” crisscrossed the seas and canals of Europe with their 
comic and pathetic cargo of souls. Some of them found pleasure 
and even a cure in the changing surroundings, in the isolation of 
being cast off, while others withdrew further, became worse, or 
died alone and away from their families. The cities and villages 
which had thus rid themselves of their crazed and crazy, could 


6 



now take pleasure in watching the exciting sideshow when a ship 
full of foreign lunatics would dock at their harbors. The 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries saw much social unrest and 
economic depression, which they tried to solve by imprisoning 
the indigents with the criminals and forcing them to work. The 
demented fitted quite naturally between those two extremes of 
social maladjustment and iniquity. 

A nice and hallowed tradition has labeled Tuke and Pinel as 
the saviors of the mentally ill, but the truth of the matter is not 
so simple. Many others had treated them with kindness, 
pleading that they belonged first and foremost with their 
families, and for at least two hundred years before the 1780s, 
legislation had been considered or passed to segregate criminals 
and indigents from fools. But this legislation was prompted, as 
often as not, by a desire to protect the poor, the criminal, the 
man imprisoned for debts, and the juvenile delinquent from the 
frightening bestiality of the madman. As the madman had 
replaced the leper, the mentally ill person was now a subhuman 
and beastly scapegoat; hence the need to protect others. While 
the Quaker Tuke applied his religious principles, first to 
demented “friends” and later to foes also, partly to convert them, 
the great Pinel was not sure at times that he was dealing with 
sick people; he often marveled at their unbelievable endurance of 
physical hardship, and often cited the ability of schizophrenic 
women to sleep naked in subfreezing temperatures without 
suffering any ill effects. Were not these people more healthy, 
more resistant than ordinary human beings? Didn’t they have too 
much animal spirit in them? 

Naturally, it is impossible to discuss a book as complex as 
Madness and Civilization without oversimplifying and doing it an 
injustice. It is a tale of nuances, relative values, and delicate 
shadings. Yet, it is an impressive monument: in a dispassionate 
manner it marshals overwhelming evidence to dispel more 
effectively than many previous attempts the myth of mental 


7 



illness, and re-establishes folly and unreason in their rightful 
place as complex, human—too human—phenomena. The roots 
and symptoms of folly are being looked for today in psychology, 
medicine, and sociology, but they were and still are as present 
and important in art,* religion, ethics, and epistemology. 
Madness is really a manifestation of the “soul,” a variable concept 
which from antiquity to the twentieth century covered 
approximately what came to be known, after Freud, as the 
unconscious part of the human mind.f Only time will tell how 
much better students of the psyche can look at the future, after 
reading this sobering re-creation of yesteryear’s madness and the 
ineffective attempts of humanity to treat it by amputation, 
projections, prejudices, and segregation. 

JOSE BARCHILON, M.D. 


My only quarrel with the book is the lack of emphasis on the 
humoristic elements in psychoses and neuroses: i.e., the patient 
laughs at himself, or laughs at the world through his illness. 

t The fear and dread of madness is as real a factor in social and 
medical attitudes or measures as anxiety, symptoms, and 
resistance in coping with impulses from the individual 
unconscious; even though the author does not explicitly 
compare madness with the unconscious, he equates madness 
and dream activity so that the inference is clear enough. 


8 



PREFACE 


PASCAL: “Men are so necessarily mad, that not to be mad 
would amount to another form of madness.” And Dostoievsky, in 
his DIARY OF A WRITER: “It is not by confining one’s 
neighbor that one is convinced of one’s own sanity.” 

We have yet to write the history of that other form of madness, by 
which men,, in an act of sovereign reason, confine their neighbors, and 
communicate and recognize each other through the merciless language 
of non-madness; to define the moment of this conspiracy before it was 
permanently established in the realm of truth, before it was revived by 
the lyricism of protest. We must try to return, in history, to that zero 
point in the course of madness at which madness is an undifferentiated 
experience, a not yet divided experience of division itself We must 
describe, from the start of its trajectory, that “other form” which 
relegates Reason and Madness to one side or the other of its action as 
things henceforth external\ deaf to all exchange, and as though dead to 
one another. 

This is doubtless an uncomfortable region. To explore it we must 
renounce the convenience of terminal truths, and never let ourselves be 
guided by what we may know of madness. None of the concepts oj 
psychopathology, even and especially in the implicit process oj 
retrospections, can play an organizing role. What is constitutive is the 
action that divides madness, and not the science elaborated once this 
division is made and calm restored. What is originative is the caesura 
that establishes the distance between reason and non-reason; reasons 
subjugation of non-reason, wresting from it its truth as madness, 
crime, or disease, derives explicitly from this point. Hence we must 
speak of that initial dispute without assuming a victory, or the right 
to a victory; we must speak of those actions re-examined in history, 
leaving in abeyance all that may figure as a conclusion, as a refuge in 
truth; we shall have to speak of this act of scission, of this distance set, 


9 



of this void instituted between reason and what is not reason, without 
ever relying upon thefulfillment of what it claims to be. 

Then, and then only, can we determine the realm in which the 
man of madness and the man of reason,, moving apart, are not yet 
disjunct; and in an incipient and very crude language, antedating 
that of science, begin the dialogue of their breach, testifying in a 
fugitive way that they still speak to each other. Here madness and 
non-madness, reason and non-reason are inextricably involved: 
inseparable at the moment when they do not yet exist, and existing for 
each other , in relation to each other , in the exchange which separates 
them. 

In the serene world of mental illness, modern man no longer 
communicates with the madman: on one hand, the man of reason 
delegates the physician to madness, thereby authorizing a relation only 
through the abstract universality of disease; on the other , the man oj 
madness communicates with society only by the intermediary of an 
equally abstract reason which is order, physical and moral constraint, 
the anonymous pressure of the group, the requirements of conformity. 
As for a common language, there is no such thing; or rather, there is no 
such thing any longer; the constitution of madness as a mental illness, 
at the end of the eighteenth century, affords the evidence of a broken 
dialogue, posits the separation as already effected, and thrusts into 
oblivion all those stammered, imperfect words withoutfixed syntax in 
which the exchange between madness and reason was made. The 
language of psychiatry, which is a monologue of reason about 
madness, has been established only on the basis of such a silence. 

I have not tried to write the history of that language, but rather the 
archaeology of that silence. 

The Greeks had a relation to something that they called '$€>'•<;■. This 
relation was not merely one of condemnation; the existence oj 
Thrasymachus or of Callicles suffices to prove it, even if their language 
has reached us already enveloped in the reassuring dialectic of Socrates. 
But the Greek Logos had no contrary. 


10 



European man, since the beginning of the Middle Ages, has had a 
relation to something he calls, indiscriminately, Madness, Dementia, 
Insanity. Perhaps it is to this obscure presence that Western reason 
owes something of its depth, as the owqppoowri of the Socratic reasoners 
owes something to the threat of upQi?.. In any case, the Reason- 
Madness nexus constitutes for Western culture one of the dimensions op 
its originality; it already accompanied that culture long before 
Hieronymus Bosch, and will follow it long after Nietzsche and 
Artaud. 

What, then, is this confrontation beneath the language of reason f 
Where can an interrogation lead us which does notfollow reason in its 
horizontal course, but seeks to retrace in time that constant vertically 
which confronts European culture with what it is not, establishes its 
range by its own derangementf What realm do we enter which is 
neither the history of knowledge, nor history itself; which is controlled 
by neither the teleology of truth nor the rational sequence of causes, 
since causes have value and meaning only beyond the division f A 
realm, no doubt, where what is in question is the limits rather than 
the identity of a culture. 

The classical period—from Willis to Pinel, from the frenzies op 
Racine's Oreste to Sades Juliette and the Quinta del Sordo of Goya — 
covers precisely that epoch in which the exchange between madness 
and reason modifies its language, and in a radical manner. In the 
history of madness, two events indicate this change with a singular 
clarity: 1657, the creation of the Hopital General and the “great 
confinement ” of the poor; 1794, the liberation of the chained inmates 
of Bicetre. Between these two unique and symmetrical events, 
something happens whose ambiguity has left the historians of medicine 
at a loss: blind repression in an absolutist regime, according to some; 
but according to others, the gradual discovery by science and 
philanthropy of madness in its positive truth. As a matter of fact, 
beneath these reversible meanings, a structure is forming which does 
not resolve the ambiguity but determines it. It is this structure which 


11 



accountsfor the transition from the medieval and humanist experience 
of madness to our own experience> which confines insanity within 
mental illness. In the Middle Ages and until the Renaissance, mans 
dispute with madness was a dramatic debate in which he confronted 
the secret powers of the world; the experience of madness was clouded 
by images of the Fall and the Will of God\ of the Beast and the 
Metamorphosis , and of all the marvelous secrets of Knowledge. In our 
era; the experience of madness remains silent in the composure of a 
knowledge which, knowing too much about madness> forgets it. But 
from one of these experiences to the other , the shift has been made by a 
world without images, without positive character , in a kind of silent 
transparency which reveals—as mute institution , act without 
commentary , immediate knowledge—a great motionless structure; this 
structure is one of neither drama nor knowledge; it is the point where 
history is immobilized in the tragic category which both establishes 
and impugns it. 


12 



CONTENTS 


Cover 

Other Books by This Author 

Title Page 

Copyright 

Introduction 



I “Stultifera Navis ” 

II The Great Confinement 

III The Insane 

IV Passion and Delirium 

V Aspects of Madness 

VI Doctors and Patients 

VII The Great Fear 

VIII The New Division 

IX The Birth of the Asylum 

Conclusion 

Notes 

About the Author 
Books by Michel Foucault 


13 


I 



14 


“STULTIFERA 


NAVIS” 


AT the end of the Middle Ages, leprosy disappeared from the 
Western world. In the margins of the community, at the gates of 
cities, there stretched wastelands which sickness had ceased to 
haunt but had left sterile and long uninhabitable. For centuries, 
these reaches would belong to the non-human. From the 
fourteenth to the seventeenth century, they would wait, soliciting 
with strange incantations a new incarnation of disease, another 
grimace of terror, renewed rites of purification and exclusion. 

From the High Middle Ages to the end of the Crusades, 
leprosariums had multiplied their cities of the damned over the 
entire face of Europe. According to Mathieu Paris, there were as 
many as 19,000 of them throughout Christendom. In any case, 
around 1226, when Louis VIII established the lazar-house law 
for France, more than 2,000 appeared on the official registers. 
There were 43 in the diocese of Paris alone: these included 
Bourg-le-Reine, Corbeil, Saint-Valere, and the sinister Champ- 
Pourri (Rotten Field); included also was Charenton. The two 
largest were in the immediate vicinity of Paris: Saint-Germain 
and Saint-Lazare:l we shall hear their names again in the history 
of another sickness. This is because from the fifteenth century 
on, all were emptied; in the next century Saint-Germain became 
a reformatory for young criminals; and before the time of Saint 
Vincent there was only one leper left at Saint-Lazare, “Sieur 
Langlois, practitioner in the civil court.” The lazar house of 
Nancy, which was among the largest in Europe, had only four 
inmates during the regency of Marie de Medicis. According to 
Catefs Memoires, there were 29 hospitals in Toulouse at the end 
of the medieval period: seven were leprosariums; but at the 
beginning of the seventeenth century we find only three 


15 


mentioned: Saint-Cyprien, Arnaud-Bernard, and Saint-Michel. 
It was a pleasure to celebrate the disappearance of leprosy: in 
1635 the inhabitants of Reims formed a solemn procession to 
thank God for having delivered their city from this scourge. 

For a century already, royal authority had undertaken the 
control and reorganization of the immense fortune represented 
by the endowments of the lazar houses; in a decree of December 
19, 1543, Francois I had a census and inventory taken “to 
remedy the great disorder that exists at present in the lazar 
houses”; in his turn, Henri IV in an edict of 1606 prescribed a 
revision of their accounts and allotted “the sums obtained from 
this investigation to the sustenance of poor noblemen and 
crippled soldiers.” The same request for regulation is recorded on 
October 24, 1612, but the excess revenues were now to be used 
for feeding the poor. 

In fact, the question of the leprosariums was not settled in 
France before the end of the seventeenth century; and the 
problem’s economic importance provoked more than one 
conflict. Were there not still, in the year 1677, 44 lazar houses in 
the province of Dauphine alone? On February 20, 1672, Louis 
XIV assigned to the Orders of Saint-Lazare and Mont-Carmel 
the effects of all the military and hospital orders; they were 
entrusted with the administration of the lazar houses of the 
kingdom. Some twenty years later, the edict of 1672 was 
revoked, and by a series of staggered measures from March 1693 
to July 1695 the goods of the lazar houses were thenceforth 
assigned to other hospitals and welfare establishments. The few 
lepers scattered in the 1,200 still-existing houses were collected 
at Saint-Mesmin near Orleans. These decrees were first applied 
in Paris, where the Parlement transferred the revenue in question 
to the establishments of the Hopital General; this example was 
imitated by the provincial authorities; Toulouse transferred the 
effects of its lazar houses to the Hopital des Incurables (1696); 
those of Beaulieu in Normandy went to the Hotel-Dieu in Caen; 


16 



those of Voley were assigned to the Hopital de Sainte-Foy. Only 
Saint-Mesmin and the wards of Ganets, near Bordeaux, 
remained as a reminder. 

England and Scotland alone had opened 220 lazar houses for a 
million and a half inhabitants in the twelfth century. But as early 
as the fourteenth century they began to empty out; by the time 
Edward III ordered an inquiry into the hospital of Ripon—in 
1342—there were no more lepers; he assigned the institution’s 
effects to the poor. At the end of the twelfth century, 
Archbishop Puisel had founded a hospital in which by 1434 only 
two beds were reserved for lepers, should any be found. In 1348, 
the great leprosarium of Saint Albans contained only three 
patients; the hospital of Romenal in Kent was abandoned 
twenty-four years later, for lack of lepers. At Chatham, the lazar 
house of Saint Bartholomew, established in 1078, had been one 
of the most important in England; under Elizabeth, it cared for 
only two patients; it was finally closed in 1627. 

The same regression of leprosy occurred in Germany, perhaps 
a little more slowly; and the same conversion of the lazar houses, 
hastened by the Reformation, which left municipal 
administrations in charge of welfare and hospital establishments; 
this was the case in Leipzig, in Munich, in Hamburg. In 1542, 
the effects of the lazar houses of Schleswig-Holstein were 
transferred to the hospitals. In Stuttgart a magistrate’s report of 
1589 indicates that for fifty years already there had been no 
lepers in the house provided for them. At Lipplingen, the lazar 
house was soon peopled with incurables and madmen. 

A strange disappearance, which was doubtless not the long- 
sought effect of obscure medical practices, but the spontaneous 
result of segregation and also the consequence, after the 
Crusades, of the break with the Eastern sources of infection. 
Leprosy withdrew, leaving derelict these low places and these 
rites which were intended, not to suppress it, but to keep it at a 
sacred distance, to fix it in an inverse exaltation. What doubtless 


17 



remained longer than leprosy, and would persist when the lazar 
houses had been empty for years, were the values and images 
attached to the figure of the leper as well as the meaning of his 
exclusion, the social importance of that insistent and fearful 
figure which was not driven off without first being inscribed 
within a sacred circle. 

If the leper was removed from the world, and from the 
community of the Church visible, his existence was yet a 
constant manifestation of God, since it was a sign both of His 
anger and of His grace: “My friend,” says the ritual of the 
Church of Vienne, “it pleaseth Our Lord that thou shouldst be 
infected with this malady, and thou hast great grace at the hands 
of Our Lord that he desireth to punish thee for thy iniquities in 
this world.” And at the very moment when the priest and his 
assistants drag him out of the church with backward step, the 
leper is assured that he still bears witness for God: “And 
howsoever thou mayest be apart from the Church and the 
company of the Sound, yet art thou not apart from the grace of 
God.” Brueghefs lepers attend at a distance, but forever, that 
climb to Calvary on which the entire people accompanies Christ. 
Hieratic witnesses of evil, they accomplish their salvation in and 
by their very exclusion: in a strange reversibility that is the 
opposite of good works and prayer, they are saved by the hand 
that is not stretched out. The sinner who abandons the leper at 
his door opens his way to heaven. “For which have patience in 
thy malady; for Our Lord hateth thee not because of it, keepeth 
thee not from his company; but if thou hast patience thou wilt be 
saved, as was the leper who died before the gate of the rich man 
and was carried straight to paradise.” Abandonment is his 
salvation; his exclusion offers him another form of communion. 

Leprosy disappeared, the leper vanished, or almost, from 
memory; these structures remained. Often, in these same places, 
the formulas of exclusion would be repeated, strangely similar 
two or three centuries later. Poor vagabonds, criminals, and 


18 



“deranged minds” would take the part played by the leper, and 
we shall see what salvation was expected from this exclusion, for 
them and for those who excluded them as well. With an 
altogether new meaning and in a very different culture, the forms 
would remain—essentially that major form of a rigorous division 
which is social exclusion but spiritual reintegration. 

Something new appears in the imaginary landscape of the 
Renaissance; soon it will occupy a privileged place there: the 
Ship of Fools, a strange “drunken boat” that glides along the 
calm rivers of the Rhineland and the Flemish canals. 

The Narrenschiff, of course, is a literary composition, probably 
borrowed from the old Argonaut cycle, one of the great mythic 
themes recently revived and rejuvenated, acquiring an 
institutional aspect in the Burgundy Estates. Fashion favored the 
composition of these Ships, whose crew of imaginary heroes, 
ethical models, or social types embarked on a great symbolic 
voyage which would bring them, if not fortune, then at least the 
figure of their destiny or their truth. Thus Symphorien 
Champier composes a Ship of Princes and Battles of Nobility in 
1502, then a Ship of Virtuous Ladies in 1503; there is also a Ship of 
Health , alongside the Blauwe Schute of Jacob van Oestvoren in 
1413, Sebastian Brant’s Narrenschiff (1494), and the work of 
Josse Bade: Stultiferae naviculae scaphae fatuarum mulierum 
(1498). Bosch’s painting, of course, belongs to this dream fleet. 

But of all these romantic or satiric vessels, the Narrenschiff is 
the only one that had a real existence—for they did exist, these 
boats that conveyed their insane cargo from town to town. 
Madmen then led an easy wandering existence. The towns drove 
them outside their limits; they were allowed to wander in the 
open countryside, when not entrusted to a group of merchants 
and pilgrims. The custom was especially frequent in Germany; in 
Nuremberg, in the first half of the fifteenth century, the presence 
of 63 madmen had been registered; 31 were driven away; in the 


19 



fifty years that followed, there are records of 21 more obligatory 
departures; and these are only the madmen arrested by the 
municipal authorities. Frequently they were handed over to 
boatmen: in Frankfort, in 1399, seamen were instructed to rid 
the city of a madman who walked about the streets naked; in the 
first years of the fifteenth century, a criminal madman was 
expelled in the same manner from Mainz. Sometimes the sailors 
disembarked these bothersome passengers sooner than they had 
promised; witness a blacksmith of Frankfort twice expelled and 
twice returning before being taken to Kreuznach for good. Often 
the cities of Europe must have seen these “ships of fools” 
approaching their harbors. 

It is not easy to discover the exact meaning of this custom. 
One might suppose it was a general means of extradition by 
which municipalities sent wandering madmen out of their own 
jurisdiction; a hypothesis which will not in itself account for the 
facts, since certain madmen, even before special houses were 
built for them, were admitted to hospitals and cared for as such; 
at the Hotel-Dieu in Paris, their cots were set up in the 
dormitories. Moreover, in the majority of the cities of Europe 
there existed throughout the Middle Ages and the Renaissance a 
place of detention reserved for the insane; there was for example 
the Chatelet of Melun or the famous Tour aux Fous in Caen; 
there were the numberless Narrturmer of Germany, like the gates 
of Liibeck or the Jungpfer of Hamburg. Madmen were thus not 
invariably expelled. One might then speculate that among them 
only foreigners were driven away, each city agreeing to care for 
those madmen among its own citizens. Do we not in fact find 
among the account books of certain medieval cities subsidies for 
madmen or donations made for the care of the insane? However, 
the problem is not so simple, for there existed gathering places 
where the madmen, more numerous than elsewhere, were not 
autochthonous. First come the shrines: Saint-Mathurin de 
Larchant, Saint-Hildevert de Gournay, Besan^on, Gheel; 


20 



pilgrimages to these places were organized, often supported, by 
cities or hospitals. It is possible that these ships of fools, which 
haunted the imagination of the entire early Renaissance, were 
pilgrimage boats, highly symbolic cargoes of madmen in search 
of their reason: some went down the Rhineland rivers toward 
Belgium and Gheel; others sailed up the Rhine toward the Jura 
and Besan^on. 

But other cities, like Nuremberg, were certainly not shrines 
and yet contained great numbers of madmen-many more, in any 
case, than could have been furnished by the city itself. These 
madmen were housed and provided for in the city budget, and 
yet they were not given treatment; they were simply thrown into 
prison. We may suppose that in certain important cities—centers 
of travel and markets—madmen had been brought in 
considerable numbers by merchants and mariners and “lost” 
there, thus ridding their native cities of their presence. It may 
have happened that these places of “counterpilgrimage” have 
become confused with the places where, on the contrary, the 
insane were taken as pilgrims. Interest in cure and in exclusion 
coincide: madmen were confined in the holy locus of a miracle. 
It is possible that the village of Gheel developed in this manner 
—a shrine that became a ward, a holy land where madness hoped 
for deliverance, but where man enacted, according to old themes, 
a sort of ritual division. 

What matters is that the vagabond madmen, the act of driving 
them away, their departure and embarkation do not assume their 
entire significance on the plane of social utility or security. Other 
meanings much closer to rite are certainly present; and we can 
still discern some traces of them. Thus access to churches was 
denied to madmen, although ecclesiastical law did not deny them 
the use of the sacraments. The Church takes no action against a 
priest who goes mad; but in Nuremberg in 1421 a mad priest 
was expelled with particular solemnity, as if the impurity was 
multiplied by the sacred nature of his person, and the city put on 


21 



its budget the money given him as a viaticum. It happened that 
certain madmen were publicly whipped, and in the course of a 
kind of a game they were chased in a mock race and driven out 
of the city with quarterstaff blows. So many signs that the 
expulsion of madmen had become one of a number of ritual 
exiles. 

Thus we better understand the curious implication assigned to 
the navigation of madmen and the prestige attending it. On the 
one hand, we must not minimize its incontestable practical 
effectiveness: to hand a madman over to sailors was to be 
permanently sure he would not be prowling beneath the city 
walls; it made sure that he would go far away; it made him a 
prisoner of his own departure. But water adds to this the dark 
mass of its own values; it carries off, but it does more: it purifies. 
Navigation delivers man to the uncertainty of fate; on water, 
each of us is in the hands of his own destiny; every embarkation 
is, potentially, the last. It is for the other world that the madman 
sets sail in his fools’ boat; it is from the other world that he 
comes when he disembarks. The madman’s voyage is at once a 
rigorous division and an absolute Passage. In one sense, it simply 
develops, across a half-real, half-imaginary geography, the 
madman’s liminal position on the horizon of medieval concern— 
a position symbolized and made real at the same time by the 
madman’s privilege of being confined within the city gates', his 
exclusion must enclose him; if he cannot and must not have 
another prison than the threshold itself, he is kept at the point of 
passage. He is put in the interior of the exterior, and inversely. A 
highly symbolic position, which will doubtless remain his until 
our own day, if we are willing to admit that what was formerly a 
visible fortress of order has now become the castle of our 
conscience. 

Water and navigation certainly play this role. Confined on the 
ship, from which there is no escape, the madman is delivered to 
the river with its thousand arms, the sea with its thousand roads, 


22 



to that great uncertainty external to everything. He is a prisoner 
in the midst of what is the freest, the openest of routes: bound 
fast at the infinite crossroads. He is the Passenger par excellence'. 
that is, the prisoner of the passage. And the land he will come to 
is unknown—as is, once he disembarks, the land from which he 
comes. He has his truth and his homeland only in that fruitless 
expanse between two countries that cannot belong to him. Is it 
this ritual and these values which are at the origin of the long 
imaginary relationship that can be traced through the whole of 
Western culture? Or is it, conversely, this relationship that, from 
time immemorial, has called into being and established the rite 
of embarkation? One thing at least is certain: water and madness 
have long been linked in the dreams of European man. 

Already, disguised as a madman, Tristan had ordered boatmen 
to land him on the coast of Cornwall. And when he arrived at 
the castle of King Mark, no one recognized him, no one knew 
whence he had come. But he made too many strange remarks, 
both familiar and distant; he knew too well the secrets of the 
commonplace not to have been from another, yet nearby, world. 
He did not come from the solid land, with its solid cities; but 
indeed from the ceaseless unrest of the sea, from those unknown 
highways which conceal so much strange knowledge, from that 
fantastic plain, the underside of the world. Iseut, first of all, 
realized that this madman was a son of the sea, and that insolent 
sailors had cast him here, a sign of misfortune: “Accursed be the 
sailors that brought this madman! Why did they not throw him 

into the sea!” - And more than once in the course of time, the 
same theme reappears: among the mystics of the fifteenth 
century, it has become the motif of the soul as a skiff, abandoned 
on the infinite sea of desires, in the sterile field of cares and 
ignorance, among the mirages of knowledge, amid the unreason 
of the world—a craft at the mercy of the sea s great madness, 
unless it throws out a solid anchor, faith, or raises its spiritual 


23 


sails so that the breath of God may bring it to port. At the end of 
the sixteenth century, De Lancre sees in the sea the origin of the 
demoniacal leanings of an entire people: the hazardous labor of 
ships, dependence on the stars, hereditary secrets, estrangement 
from women—the very image of the great, turbulent plain itself 
makes man lose faith in God and all his attachment to his home; 
he is then in the hands of the Devil, in the sea of Satan’s ruses.3 
In the classical period, the melancholy of the English was easily 
explained by the influence of a maritime climate, cold, humidity, 
the instability of the weather; all those fine droplets of water that 
penetrated the channels and fibers of the human body and made 
it lose its firmness, predisposed it to madness. Finally, neglecting 
an immense literature that stretches from Ophelia to the Lorelei, 
let us note only the great half-anthropological, half-cosmological 
analyses of Heinroth, which interpret madness as the 
manifestation in man of an obscure and aquatic element, a dark 
disorder, a moving chaos, the seed and death of all things, which 
opposes the mind’s luminous and adult stability. 

But if the navigation of madmen is linked in the Western 
mind with so many immemorial motifs, why, so abruptly, in the 
fifteenth century, is the theme suddenly formulated in literature 
and iconography? Why does the figure of the Ship of Fools and 
its insane crew all at once invade the most familiar landscapes? 
Why, from the old union of water and madness, was this ship 
born one day, and on just that day? 

Because it symbolized a great disquiet, suddenly dawning on 
the horizon of European culture at the end of the Middle Ages. 
Madness and the madman become major figures, in their 
ambiguity: menace and mockery, the dizzying unreason of the 
world, and the feeble ridicule of men. 

First a whole literature of tales and moral fables, in origin, 
doubtless, quite remote. But by the end of the Middle Ages, it 
bulks large: a long series of “follies” which, stigmatizing vices and 


24 


faults as in the past, no longer attribute them all to pride, to lack 
of charity, to neglect of Christian virtues, but to a sort of great 
unreason for which nothing, in fact, is exactly responsible, but 
which involves everyone in a kind of secret complicity. The 
denunciation of madness {la folie) becomes the general form of 
criticism. In farces and soties, the character of the Madman, the 
Fool, or the Simpleton assumes more and more importance. He 
is no longer simply a ridiculous and familiar silhouette in the 
wings: he stands center stage as the guardian of truth-playing 
here a role which is the complement and converse of that taken 
by madness in the tales and the satires. If folly leads each man 
into a blindness where he is lost, the madman, on the contrary, 
reminds each man of his truth; in a comedy where each man 
deceives the other and dupes himself, the madman is comedy to 
the second degree: the deception of deception; he utters, in his 
simpleton s language which makes no show of reason, the words 
of reason that release, in the comic, the comedy: he speaks love 
to lovers, the truth of life to the young, the middling reality of 
things to the proud, to the insolent, and to liars. Even the old 
feasts of fools, so popular in Flanders and northern Europe, were 
theatrical events, and organized into social and moral criticism, 
whatever they may have contained of spontaneous religious 

In learned literature, too, Madness or Folly was at work, at the 
very heart of reason and truth. It is Folly which embarks all men 
without distinction on its insane ship and binds them to the 
vocation of a common odyssey (Van Oestvoren’s Blauwe Schute , 
Brant’s Narrenschifj)\ it is Folly whose baleful reign Thomas 
Murner conjures up in his Narrenbeschworung ; it is Folly which 
gets the best of Love in Corroz’s satire Contre fol amour , or 
argues with Love as to which of the two comes first, which of the 
two makes the other possible, and triumphs in Louise Labe’s 
dialogue, Debat de folie et d'amour. Folly also has its academic 
pastimes; it is the object of argument, it contends against itself; it 



25 



is denounced, and defends itself by claiming that it is closer to 
happiness and truth than reason, that it is closer to reason than 
reason itself; Jakob Wimpfeling edits the Monopolium 
philo soph orum, and Judocus Gallus the Monopolium et societas , 
vulgo des lichtschijfs. Finally, at the center of all these serious 
games, the great humanist texts: the Moria rediviva of Flayder 
and Erasmus’s Praise of Folly. And confronting all these 
discussions, with their tireless dialectic, confronting these 
discourses constantly reworded and reworked, a long dynasty of 
images, from Hieronymus Bosch with The Cure of Madness and 
The Ship of Fools , down to Brueghel and his Dulle Griet\ 
woodcuts and engravings transcribe what the theater, what 
literature and art have already taken up: the intermingled themes 
of the Feast and of the Dance of Fools. Indeed, from the 
fifteenth century on, the face of madness has haunted the 
imagination of Western man. 

A sequence of dates speaks for itself: the Dance of Death in the 
Cimetiere des Innocents doubtless dates from the first years of 
the fifteenth century, the one in the Chaise-Dieu was probably 
composed around 1460; and it was in 1485 that Guyot Marchant 
published his Danse macabre. These sixty years, certainly, were 
dominated by all this grinning imagery of Death. And it was in 
1494 that Brant wrote the Narrenschiff in 1497 it was translated 
into Latin. In the very last years of the century Hieronymus 
Bosch painted his Ship of Fools. The Praise of Folly dates from 
1509. The order of succession is clear. 

Up to the second half of the fifteenth century, or even a little 
beyond, the theme of death reigns alone. The end of man, the 
end of time bear the face of pestilence and war. What overhangs 
human existence is this conclusion and this order from which 
nothing escapes. The presence that threatens even within this 
world is a fleshless one. Then in the last years of the century this 
enormous uneasiness turns on itself; the mockery of madness 
replaces death and its solemnity. From the discovery of that 


26 



necessity which inevitably reduces man to nothing, we have 
shifted to the scornful contemplation of that nothing which is 
existence itself Fear in the face of the absolute limit of death 
turns inward in a continuous irony; man disarms it in advance, 
making it an object of derision by giving it an everyday, tamed 
form, by constantly renewing it in the spectacle of life, by 
scattering it throughout the vices, the difficulties, and the 
absurdities of all men. Death’s annihilation is no longer anything 
because it was already everything, because life itself was only 
futility, vain words, a squabble of cap and bells. The head that 
will become a skull is already empty. Madness is the deja-la of 
death. 4 But it is also its vanquished presence, evaded in those 
everyday signs which, announcing that death reigns already, 
indicate that its prey will be a sorry prize indeed. What death 
unmasks was never more than a mask; to discover the grin of the 
skeleton, one need only lift off something that was neither 
beauty nor truth, but only a plaster and tinsel face. From the vain 
mask to the corpse, the same smile persists. But when the 
madman laughs, he already laughs with the laugh of death; the 
lunatic, anticipating the macabre, has disarmed it. The cries of 
Dulle Griet triumph, in the high Renaissance, over that Triumph 
of Death sung at the end of the Middle Ages on the walls of the 
Campo Santo. 

The substitution of the theme of madness for that of death 
does not mark a break, but rather a torsion within the same 
anxiety. What is in question is still the nothingness of existence, 
but this nothingness is no longer considered an external, final 
term, both threat and conclusion; it is experienced from within 
as the continuous and constant form of existence. And where 
once man s madness had been not to see that death’s term was 
approaching, so that it was necessary to recall him to wisdom 
with the spectacle of death, now wisdom consisted of 
denouncing madness everywhere, teaching men that they were 


27 


no more than dead men already, and that if the end was near, it 
was to the degree that madness, become universal, would be one 
and the same with death itself. This is what Eustache 
Deschamps prophesies: 

We are cowardly and weak, 

Covetous, old, evil-tongued. 

Fools are all I see, in truth. 

The end is near, 

All goes ill ... 

The elements are now reversed. It is no longer the end of time 
and of the world which will show retrospectively that men were 
mad not to have been prepared for them; it is the tide of 
madness, its secret invasion, that shows that the world is near its 
final catastrophe; it is man s insanity that invokes and makes 
necessary the world’s end. 

In its various forms—plastic or literary—this experience of 
madness seems extremely coherent. Painting and text constantly 
refer to one another—commentary here and illustration there. 
We find the same theme of the Narrentanz over and over in 
popular festivals, in theatrical performances, in engravings and 
woodcuts, and the entire last part of the Praise of Folly is 
constructed on the model of a long dance of madmen in which 
each profession and each estate parades in turn to form the great 
round of unreason. It is likely that in Bosch’s Temptation of Saint 
Anthony in Lisbon, many figures of the fantastic fauna which 
invade the canvas are borrowed from traditional masks; some 
perhaps are transferred from the Malleus maleficarum. As for the 
famous Ship of Fools , is it not a direct translation of Brant’s 
Narrenschiff whose title it bears, and of which it seems to 
illustrate quite precisely canto XXVII, also consecrated to 
stigmatizing “drunkards and gluttons”? It has even been 


28 



suggested that Bosch’s painting was part of a series of pictures 
illustrating the principal cantos of Brant’s poem. 

As a matter of fact, we must not be misled by what appears to 
be a strict continuity in these themes, nor imagine more than is 
revealed by history itself. It is unlikely that an analysis like the 
one Emile Male worked out for the preceding epochs, especially 
apropos of the theme of death, could be repeated. Between word 
and image, between what is depicted by language and what is 
uttered by plastic form, the unity begins to dissolve; a single and 
identical meaning is not immediately common to them. And if it 
is true that the image still has the function of speaking, of 
transmitting something consubstantial with language, we must 
recognize that it already no longer says the same thing ; and that 
by its own plastic values painting engages in an experiment that 
will take it farther and farther from language, whatever the 
superficial identity of the theme. Figure and speech still illustrate 
the same fable of folly in the same moral world, but already they 
take two different directions, indicating, in a still barely 
perceptible scission, what will be the great line of cleavage in the 
Western experience of madness. 

The dawn of madness on the horizon of the Renaissance is 
first perceptible in the decay of Gothic symbolism; as if that 
world, whose network of spiritual meanings was so close-knit, 
had begun to unravel, showing faces whose meaning was no 
longer clear except in the forms of madness. The Gothic forms 
persist for a time, but little by little they grow silent, cease to 
speak, to remind, to teach anything but their own fantastic 
presence, transcending all possible language (though still familiar 
to the eye). Freed from wisdom and from the teaching that 
organized it, the image begins to gravitate about its own 
madness. 

Paradoxically, this liberation derives from a proliferation of 
meaning, from a self-multiplication of significance, weaving 
relationships so numerous, so intertwined, so rich, that they can 


29 



no longer be deciphered except in the esoterism of knowledge. 
Things themselves become so burdened with attributes, signs, 
allusions that they finally lose their own form. Meaning is no 
longer read in an immediate perception, the figure no longer 
speaks for itself; between the knowledge which animates it and 
the form into which it is transposed, a gap widens. It is free for 
the dream. One book bears witness to meaning s proliferation at 
the end of the Gothic world, the Speculum humanae Salvationist 
which, beyond all the correspondences established by the 
patristic tradition, elaborates, between the Old and the New 
Testament, a symbolism not on the order of Prophecy, but 
deriving from an equivalence of imagery. The Passion of Christ 
is not prefigured only by the sacrifice of Abraham; it is 
surrounded by all the glories of torture and its innumerable 
dreams; Tubal the blacksmith and Isaiah’s wheel take their places 
around the Cross, forming beyond all the lessons of the sacrifice 
the fantastic tableau of savagery, of tormented bodies, and of 
suffering. Thus the image is burdened with supplementary 
meanings, and forced to express them. And dreams, madness, 
the unreasonable can also slip into this excess of meaning. The 
symbolic figures easily become nightmare silhouettes. Witness 
that old image of wisdom so often translated, in German 
engravings, by a long-necked bird whose thoughts, rising slowly 
from heart to head, have time to be weighed and reflected on; a 
symbol whose values are blunted by being overemphasized: the 
long path of reflection becomes in the image the alembic of a 
subtle learning, an instrument which distills quintessences. The 
neck of the Gutemensch is endlessly elongated, the better to 
illustrate, beyond wisdom, all the real mediations of knowledge; 
and the symbolic man becomes a fantastic bird whose 
disproportionate neck folds a thousand times upon itself—an 
insane being, halfway between animal and thing, closer to the 
charms of an image than to the rigor of a meaning. This 
symbolic wisdom is a prisoner of the madness of dreams. 


30 



A fundamental conversion of the world of images: the 
constraint of a multiplied meaning liberates that world from the 
control of form. So many diverse meanings are established 
beneath the surface of the image that it presents only an 
enigmatic face. And its power is no longer to teach but to 
fascinate. Characteristic is the evolution of the famous gryllos 
already familiar to the Middle Ages in the English psalters, and 
at Chartres and Bourges. It taught, then, how the soul of 
desiring man had become a prisoner of the beast; these grotesque 
faces set in the bellies of monsters belonged to the world of the 
great Platonic metaphor and denounced the spirit’s corruption in 
the folly of sin. But in the fifteenth century the gryllos, image of 
human madness, becomes one of the preferred figures in the 
countless Temptations. What assails the hermit’s tranquillity is 
not objects of desire, but these hermetic, demented forms which 
have risen from a dream, and remain silent and furtive on the 
surface of a world. In the Lisbon Temptation , facing Saint 
Anthony sits one of these figures born of madness, of its 
solitude, of its penitence, of its privations; a wan smile lights this 
bodiless face, the pure presence of anxiety in the form of an agile 
grimace. Now it is exactly this nightmare silhouette that is at 
once the subject and object of the temptation; it is this figure 
which fascinates the gaze of the ascetic—both are prisoners of a 
kind of mirror interrogation, which remains unanswered in a 
silence inhabited only by the monstrous swarm that surrounds 
them. The gryllos no longer recalls man, by its satiric form, to 
his spiritual vocation forgotten in the folly of desire. It is 
madness become Temptation; all it embodies of the impossible, 
the fantastic, the inhuman, all that suggests the unnatural, the 
writhing of an insane presence on the earth’s surface-all this is 
precisely what gives the gryllos its strange power. The freedom, 
however frightening, of his dreams, the hallucinations of his 
madness, have more power of attraction for fifteenth-century 
man than the desirable reality of the flesh. 


31 



What then is this fascination which now operates through the 
images of madness? 

First, man finds in these fantastic figures one of the secrets 
and one of the vocations of his nature. In the thought of the 
Middle Ages, the legions of animals, named once and for all by 
Adam, symbolically bear the values of humanity. But at the 
beginning of the Renaissance, the relations with animality are 
reversed; the beast is set free; it escapes the world of legend and 
moral illustration to acquire a fantastic nature of its own. And by 
an astonishing reversal, it is now the animal that will stalk man, 
capture him, and reveal him to his own truth. Impossible 
animals, issuing from a demented imagination, become the 
secret nature of man; and when on the Last Day sinful man 
appears in his hideous nakedness, we see that he has the 
monstrous shape of a delirious animal; these are the screech owls 
whose toad bodies combine, in Thierry Bouts’s Hell , with the 
nakedness of the damned; these are Stephan Lochner’s winged 
insects with cats’ heads, sphinxes with beetles’ wing cases, birds 
whose wings are as disturbing and as avid as hands; this is the 
great beast of prey with knotty fingers that figures in Matthias 
Griinewald’s Temptation. Animality has escaped domestication 
by human symbols and values; and it is animality that reveals the 
dark rage, the sterile madness that lie in men’s hearts. 

At the opposite pole to this nature of shadows, madness 
fascinates because it is knowledge. It is knowledge, first, because 
all these absurd figures are in reality elements of a difficult, 
hermetic, esoteric learning. These strange forms are situated, 
from the first, in the space of the Great Secret, and the Saint 
Anthony who is tempted by them is not a victim of the violence 
of desire but of the much more insidious lure of curiosity; he is 
tempted by that distant and intimate knowledge which is 
offered, and at the same time evaded, by the smile of the gryllos; 
his backward movement is nothing but that step by which he 
keeps from crossing the forbidden limits of knowledge; he knows 


32 



already—and that is his temptation—what Jerome Cardan will 
say later: “Wisdom, like other precious substances, must be torn 
from the bowels of the earth.” This knowledge, so inaccessible, 
so formidable, the Fool, in his innocent idiocy, already possesses. 
While the man of reason and wisdom perceives only fragmentary 
and all the more unnerving images of it, the Fool bears it intact 
as an unbroken sphere: that crystal ball which for all others is 
empty is in his eyes filled with the density of an invisible 
knowledge. Brueghel mocks the sick man who tries to penetrate 
this crystal sphere, but it is this iridescent bubble of knowledge— 
an absurd but infinitely precious lantern—that sways at the end 
of the stick Dulle Griet bears on her shoulder. And it is this 
sphere which figures on the reverse of the Garden of Delights. 
Another symbol of knowledge, the tree (the forbidden tree, the 
tree of promised immortality and of sin), once planted in the 
heart of the earthly paradise, has been uprooted and now forms 
the mast of the Ship of Fools, as seen in the engraving that 
illustrates Josse Bade’s Stultiferae naviculae ; it is this tree, without 
a doubt, that sways over Bosch’s Ship of Fools. 

What does it presage, this wisdom of fools? Doubtless, since it 
is a forbidden wisdom, it presages both the reign of Satan and 
the end of the world; ultimate bliss and supreme punishment; 
omnipotence on earth and the infernal fall. The Ship of Fools 
sails through a landscape of delights, where all is offered to 
desire, a sort of renewed paradise, since here man no longer 
knows either suffering or need; and yet he has not recovered his 
innocence. This false happiness is the diabolical triumph of the 
Antichrist; it is the End, already at hand. Apocalyptic dreams are 
not new, it is true, in the fifteenth century; they are, however, 
very different in nature from what they had been earlier. The 
delicately fantastic iconography of the fourteenth century, where 
castles are toppled like dice, where the Beast is always the 
traditional dragon held at bay by the Virgin, in short where the 
order of God and its imminent victory are always apparent, gives 


33 



way to a vision of the world where all wisdom is annihilated. 
This is the great witches’ Sabbath of nature: mountains melt and 
become plains, the earth vomits up the dead and bones tumble 
out of tombs; the stars fall, the earth catches fire, all life withers 
and comes to death. The end has no value as passage and 
promise; it is the advent of a night in which the world’s old 
reason is engulfed. It is enough to look at Diirer’s Horsemen of 
the Apocalypse, sent by God Himself: these are no angels of 
triumph and reconciliation; these are no heralds of serene justice, 
but the disheveled warriors of a mad vengeance. The world sinks 
into universal Fury. Victory is neither God’s nor the Devil’s: it 
belongs to Madness. 

On all sides, madness fascinates man. The fantastic images it 
generates are not fleeting appearances that quickly disappear 
from the surface of things. By a strange paradox, what is born 
from the strangest delirium was already hidden, like a secret, like 
an inaccessible truth, in the bowels of the earth. When man 
deploys the arbitrary nature of his madness, he confronts the 
dark necessity of the world; the animal that haunts his 
nightmares and his nights of privation is his own nature, which 
will lay bare hell’s pitiless truth; the vain images of blind idiocy— 
such are the world’s Magna Sciential and already, in this disorder, 
in this mad universe, is prefigured what will be the cruelty of the 
finale. In such images—and this is doubtless what gives them 
their weight, what imposes such great coherence on their fantasy 
—the Renaissance has expressed what it apprehended of the 
threats and secrets of the world. 

During the same period, the literary, philosophical, and moral 
themes of madness are in an altogether different vein. 

The Middle Ages had given madness, or folly, a place in the 
hierarchy of vices. Beginning with the thirteenth century, it is 
customarily ranked among the wicked soldiers of the 
psychomachy. It figures, at Paris as at Amiens, among the evil 


34 



soldiery, and is among the twelve dualities that dispute the 
sovereignty of the human soul: Faith and Idolatry, Hope and 
Despair, Charity and Avarice, Chastity and Lust, Prudence and 
Folly, Patience and Anger, Gentleness and Harshness, Concord 
and Discord, Obedience and Rebellion, Perseverance and 
Inconstancy, Fortitude and Cowardice, Humility and Pride. In 
the Renaissance, Folly leaves this modest place and comes to the 
fore. Whereas according to Hugues de Saint-Victor the 
genealogical tree of the Vices, that of the Old Adam, had pride 
as its root, Folly now leads the joyous throng of all human 
weaknesses. Uncontested coryphaeus, she guides them, sweeps 
them on, and names them: “Recognize them here, in the group 
of my companions.... She whose brows are drawn is Philautia 
(Self-Love). She whom you see laugh with her eyes and applaud 
with her hands is Colacia (Flattery). She who seems half asleep is 
Lethe (Forgetfulness). She who leans upon her elbows and folds 
her hands is Misoponia (Sloth). She who is crowned with roses 
and anointed with perfume is Hedonia (Sensuality). She whose 
eyes wander without seeing is Anoia (Stupidity). She whose 
abundant flesh has the hue of flowers is Tryphe (Indolence). 
And here among these young women are two gods: the god of 
Good Cheer and the god of Deep Sleep.”-' The absolute 
privilege of Folly is to reign over whatever is bad in man. But 
does she not also reign indirectly over all the good he can do: 
over ambition, that makes wise politicians; over avarice, that 
makes wealth grow; over indiscreet curiosity, that inspires 
philosophers and men of learning? Louise Labe merely follows 
Erasmus when she has Mercury implore the gods: “Do not let 
that beautiful Lady perish who has given you so much pleasure.” 

But this new royalty has little in common with the dark reign 
of which we were just speaking and which communicated with 
the great tragic powers of this world. 

True, madness attracts, but it does not fascinate. It rules all 


35 


that is easy, joyous, frivolous in the world. It is madness, folly, 
which makes men “sport and rejoice,” as it has given the gods 
“Genius, Beauty, Bacchus, Silenus, and the gentle guardian of 
gardens.”6 All within it is brilliant surface: no enigma is 
concealed. 

No doubt, madness has something to do with the strange 
paths of knowledge. The first canto of Brant’s poem is devoted 
to books and scholars; and in the engraving which illustrates this 
passage in the Latin edition of 1497, we see enthroned upon his 
bristling cathedra of books the Magister who wears behind his 
doctoral cap a fool’s cap sewn with bells. Erasmus, in his dance 
of fools, reserves a large place for scholars: after the 
Grammarians, the Poets, Rhetoricians, and Writers, come the 
Jurists; after them, the “Philosophers respectable in beard and 
mantle”; finally the numberless troop of the Theologians. But if 
knowledge is so important in madness, it is not because the latter 
can control the secrets of knowledge; on the contrary, madness is 
the punishment of a disorderly and useless science. If madness is 
the truth of knowledge, it is because knowledge is absurd, and 
instead of addressing itself to the great book of experience, loses 
its way in the dust of books and in idle debate; learning becomes 
madness through the very excess of false learning. 

0 vos doctores, qui grandia normina fertis 
Respicite antiquos patris, jurisqueperitos. 

Non in candidulispensebant dogmata libris , 

Arte sed ingenua sitibundumpectus alebant. 7 

(O ye learned men, who bear great names, 

Look back at the ancient fathers, learned 
in the law. 

They did not weigh dogmas in shining 
white books, 

But fed their thirsty hearts with natural 


36 


skill.) 


According to the theme long familiar to popular satire, madness 
appears here as the comic punishment of knowledge and its 
ignorant presumption. 

In a general way, then, madness is not linked to the world and 
its subterranean forms, but rather to man, to his weaknesses, 
dreams, and illusions. Whatever obscure cosmic manifestation 
there was in madness as seen by Bosch is wiped out in Erasmus; 
madness no longer lies in wait for mankind at the four corners of 
the earth; it insinuates itself within man, or rather it is a subtle 
rapport that man maintains with himself. The mythological 
personification of madness in Erasmus is only a literary device. 
In fact, only “follies” exist—human forms of madness: “I count as 
many images as there are men”; one need only glance at states, 
even the wisest and best governed: “So many forms of madness 
abound there, and each day sees so many new ones born, that a 
thousand Democrituses would not suffice to mock them.” There 
is no madness but that which is in every man, since it is man 
who constitutes madness in the attachment he bears for himself 
and by the illusions he entertains. Philautia is the first figure 
Folly leads out in her dance, but that is because they are linked 
by a privileged relation: self-attachment is the first sign of 
madness, but it is because man is attached to himself that he 
accepts error as truth, lies as reality, violence and ugliness as 
beauty and justice. “This man, uglier than a monkey, imagines 
himself handsome as Nereus; that one thinks he is Euclid 
because he has traced three lines with a compass; that other one 
thinks he can sing like Hermogenes, whereas he is the ass before 
the lyre, and his voice sounds as false as that of the rooster 
pecking his hen.” In this delusive attachment to himself, man 
generates his madness like a mirage. The symbol of madness will 
henceforth be that mirror which, without reflecting anything 
real, will secretly offer the man who observes himself in it the 


37 



dream of his own presumption. Madness deals not so much with 
truth and the world, as with man and whatever truth about 
himself he is able to perceive. 

It thus gives access to a completely moral universe. Evil is not 
punishment or the end of time, but only fault and flaw. A 
hundred and sixteen cantos of Brant’s poem are devoted to 
portraits of the insane passengers on the Ship: there are misers, 
slanderers, drunkards; there are those who indulge in disorder 
and debauchery; those who interpret the Scriptures falsely; those 
who practice adultery. Locher, Brant’s translator, notes in his 
Latin preface the purpose and meaning of the work; it is 
concerned to teach “what evil there may be, what good; what 
vices; whither virtue, whither error may lead”; and this while 
castigating, according to the wickedness each man is guilty of, 
“the unholy, the proud, the greedy, the extravagant, the 
debauched, the voluptuous, the quick-tempered, the gluttonous, 
the voracious, the envious, the poisoners, the faith-breakers” ... 
in short, all that man has been able to invent in the way of 
irregularities in his conduct. 

In the domain of literary and philosophic expression, the 
experience of madness in the fifteenth century generally takes the 
form of moral satire. Nothing suggests those great threats of 
invasion that haunted the imagination of the painters. On the 
contrary, great pains are taken to ward it off; one does not speak 
of such things. Erasmus turns our gaze from that insanity “which 
the Furies let slip from hell, each time they release their 
serpents”; it is not these insane forms that he has chosen to 
praise, but the “sweet illusion” that frees the soul from “its 
painful cares and returns it to the various forms of sensuality.” 
This calm world is easily mastered; it readily yields its naive 
mysteries to the eyes of the wise man, and the latter, by laughter, 
always keeps his distance. Whereas Bosch, Brueghel, and Diirer 
were terribly earth-bound spectators, implicated in that madness 
they saw surging around them, Erasmus observes it from far 


38 



enough away to be out of danger; he observes it from the heights 
of his Olympus, and if he sings its praises, it is because he can 
laugh at it with the inextinguishable laughter of the Gods. For 
the madness of men is a divine spectacle: “In fact, could one 
make observations from the Moon, as did Menippus, 
considering the numberless agitations of the Earth, one would 
think one saw a swarm of flies or gnats fighting among 
themselves, struggling and laying traps, stealing from one 
another, playing, gamboling, falling, and dying, and one would 
not believe the troubles, the tragedies that were produced by such 
a minute animalcule destined to perish so shortly.” Madness is 
no longer the familiar foreignness of the world; it is merely a 
commonplace spectacle for the foreign spectator; no longer a 
figure of the cosmos , but a characteristic of the aevum. 

But a new enterprise was being undertaken that would abolish 
the tragic experience of madness in a critical consciousness. Let 
us ignore this phenomenon for the moment and consider 
indiscriminately those figures to be found in Don Quixote as well 
as in Scudery’s novels, in King Lear as well as in the theater of 
Jean de Rotrou or Tristan fHermite. 

Let us begin with the most important, and the most durable— 
since the eighteenth century will still recognize its only just 
erased forms: madness by romantic identification. Its features have 
been fixed once and for all by Cervantes. But the theme is 
tirelessly repeated: direct adaptations (the Don Quichotte of 
Guerin de Bouscal was performed in 1639; two years later, he 
staged Le Gouvernement de Rancho Pan$a), reinterpretations of a 
particular episode (Pichou’s Les Folies de Cardenio is a variation 
on the theme of the “Ragged Knight” of the Sierra Morena), or, 
in a more indirect fashion, satire on novels of fantasy (as in 
Subligny’s La Fausse Cle'lie , and within the story itself, as in the 
episode of Julie dArviane). The chimeras are transmitted from 
author to reader, but what was fantasy on one side becomes 
hallucination on the other; the writer’s stratagem is quite naively 


39 



accepted as an image of reality. In appearance, this is nothing but 
the simple-minded critique of novels of fantasy, but just under 
the surface lies an enormous anxiety concerning the 
relationships, in a work of art, between the real and the 
imaginary, and perhaps also concerning the confused 
communication between fantastic invention and the fascinations 
of delirium. “We owe the invention of the arts to deranged 
imaginations; the Caprice of Painters, Poets, and Musicians is 
only a name moderated in civility to express their Madness .”8 
Madness, in which the values of another age, another art, 
another morality are called into question, but which also reflects 
—blurred and disturbed, strangely compromised by one another 
in a common chimera—all the forms, even the most remote, of 
the human imagination. 

Immediately following this first form: the madness of vain 
presumption. But it is not with a literary model that the madman 
identifies; it is with himself, and by means of a delusive 
attachment that enables him to grant himself all the qualities, all 
the virtues or powers he lacks. He inherits the old Philautia of 
Erasmus. Poor, he is rich; ugly, he admires himself; with chains 
still on his feet, he takes himself for God. Such a one was 
Osuma’s master of arts who believed he was Neptune.9 Such is 
the ridiculous fate of the seven characters of Desmarets de Saint- 
Sorlin’s Les Visionnaires,of Chateaufort in Cyrano de Bergerac’s 
Le Pedant joue , of M. de Richesource in Sir Politik. Measureless 
madness, which has as many faces as the world has characters, 
ambitions, and necessary illusions. Even in its extremities, this is 
the least extreme of madnesses; it is, in the heart of every man, 
the imaginary relation he maintains with himself. It engenders 
the commonest of his faults. To denounce it is the first and last 
element of all moral criticism. 

To the moral world, also, belongs the madness of just 
punishment, which chastises, along with the disorders of the 


40 


mind, those of the heart. But it has still other powers: the 
punishment it inflicts multiplies by nature insofar as, by 
punishing itself, it unveils the truth. The justification of this 
madness is that it is truthful. Truthful since the sufferer already 
experiences, in the vain whirlwind of his hallucinations, what will 
for all eternity be the pain of his punishment: Eraste, in 
Corneille’s Melite , sees himself already pursued by the 
Eumenides and condemned by Minos. Truthful, too, because the 
crime hidden from all eyes dawns like day in the night of this 
strange punishment; madness, in its wild, untamable words, 
proclaims its own meaning; in its chimeras, it utters its secret 
truth; its cries speak for its conscience. Thus Lady Macbeth’s 
delirium reveals to those who “have known what they should 
not” words long uttered only to “dead pillows.” 

Then the last type of madness: that of desperate passion. Love 
disappointed in its excess, and especially love deceived by the 
fatality of death, has no other recourse but madness. As long as 
there was an object, mad love was more love than madness; left 
to itself, it pursues itself in the void of delirium. Punishment of a 
passion too abjectly abandoned to its violence? No doubt; but 
this punishment is also a relief; it spreads, over the irreparable 
absence, the mercy of imaginary presences; it recovers, in the 
paradox of innocent joy or in the heroism of senseless pursuits, 
the vanished form. If it leads to death, it is a death in which the 
lovers will never be separated again. This is Ophelia’s last song, 
this is the delirium of Ariste in La Folie du sage. But above all, 
this is the bitter and sweet madness of King Lear. 

In Shakespeare, madness is allied to death and murder; in 
Cervantes, images are controlled by the presumption and the 
complacencies of the imaginary. These are supreme models 
whose imitators deflect and disarm them. Doubtless, both testify 
more to a tragic experience of madness appearing in the fifteenth 
century, than to a critical and moral experience of Unreason 
developing in their own epoch. Outside of time, they establish a 


41 



link with a meaning about to be lost, and whose continuity will 
no longer survive except in darkness. But it is by comparing their 
work, and what it maintains, with the meanings that develop 
among their contemporaries or imitators, that we may decipher 
what is happening, at the beginning of the seventeenth century, 
in the literary experience of madness. 

In Shakespeare or Cervantes, madness still occupies an 
extreme place, in that it is beyond appeal. Nothing ever restores 
it either to truth or to reason. It leads only to laceration and 
thence to death. Madness, in its vain words, is not vanity; the 
void that fills it is a “disease beyond my practice,” as the doctor 
says about Lady Macbeth; it is already the plenitude of death; a 
madness that has no need of a physician, but only of divine 
mercy. The sweet joy Ophelia finally regains reconciles her with 
no happiness; her mad song is as close to the essential as the “cry 
of women” that announces through the corridors of Macbeth’s 
castle that “the Queen is dead.” Certainly Don Quixote’s death 
occurs in a peaceful landscape, which at the last moment has 
rejoined reason and truth. Suddenly the Knight’s madness has 
grown conscious of itself, and in his own eyes trickles out in 
nonsense. But is this sudden wisdom of his folly anything but “a 
new madness that had just come into his head”? The 
equivocation is endlessly reversible and cannot be resolved, 
ultimately, except by death itself. Madness dissipated can be only 
the same thing as the imminence of the end; “and even one of 
the signs by which they realized that the sick man was dying, was 
that he had returned so easily from madness to reason.” But 
death itself does not bring peace; madness will still triumph—a 
truth mockingly eternal, beyond the end of a life which yet had 
been delivered from madness by this very end. Ironically, Don 
Quixote’s insane life pursues and immortalizes him only by his 
insanity; madness is still the imperishable life of death: “Here lies 
the famous hidalgo who carried valor to such lengths that it was 
said death could not triumph over life by his demise.” 


42 



But very soon, madness leaves these ultimate regions where 
Cervantes and Shakespeare had situated it; and in the literature 
of the early seventeenth century it occupies, by preference, a 
median place; it thus constitutes the knot more than the 
denouement, the peripity rather than the final release. Displaced 
in the economy of narrative and dramatic structures, it authorizes 
the manifestation of truth and the return of reason. 

Thus madness is no longer considered in its tragic reality, in 
the absolute laceration that gives it access to the other world; but 
only in the irony of its illusions. It is not a real punishment, but 
only the image of punishment, thus a pretense; it can be linked 
only to the appearance of a crime or to the illusion of a death. 
Though Ariste, in Tristan l’Hermite’s La Folk du sage , goes mad 
at the news of his daughter s death, the fact is that she is not 
really dead; when Eraste, in Melite , sees himself pursued by the 
Eumenides and dragged before Minos, it is for a double crime 
which he might have committed, which he might have wanted to 
commit, but which in fact has not occasioned any real death. 
Madness is deprived of its dramatic seriousness; it is punishment 
or despair only in the dimension of error. Its dramatic function 
exists only insofar as we are concerned with a false drama; a 
chimerical form in which only supposed faults, illusory murders, 
ephemeral disappearances are involved. 

Yet this absence of seriousness does not keep madness from 
being essential—even more essential than it had been, for if it 
brings illusion to its climax, it is from this point that illusion is 
undone. In the madness in which his error has enveloped him, 
the character involuntarily begins to unravel the web. Accusing 
himself, he speaks the truth in spite of himself. In Melite , for 
example, all the stratagems the hero has accumulated to deceive 
others are turned against himself, and he becomes their first 
victim, believing that he is guilty of the deaths of his rival and his 
mistress. But in his delirium, he blames himself for having 
invented a whole series of love letters; the truth comes to light, in 


43 



and through madness, which, provoked by the illusion of a 
denouement, actually resolves the real imbroglio of which it is 
both cause and effect. To put it another way, madness is the false 
punishment of a false solution, but by its own virtue it brings to 
light the real problem, which can then be truly resolved. It 
conceals beneath error the secret enterprise of truth. It is this 
function of madness, both ambiguous and central, that the 
author of UOspital des fous employs when he portrays a pair of 
lovers who, to escape their pursuers, pretend to be mad and hide 
among madmen; in a fit of simulated dementia, the girl, who is 
dressed as a boy, pretends to believe she is a girl—which she 
really is—thus uttering, by the reciprocal neutralization of these 
two pretenses, the truth which in the end will triumph. 

Madness is the purest, most total form of qui pro quo\ it takes 
the false for the true, death for life, man for woman, the beloved 
for the Erinnys and the victim for Minos. But it is also the most 
rigorously necessary form of the qui pro quo in the dramatic 
economy, for it needs no external element to reach a true 
resolution. It has merely to carry its illusion to the point of truth. 
Thus it is, at the very heart of the structure, in its mechanical 
center, both a feigned conclusion, pregnant with a secret 
“starting over,” and the first step toward what will turn out to be 
the reconciliation with reason and truth. It marks the point 
toward which converge, apparently, the tragic destinies of the 
characters, and from which, in reality, emerge the lines leading 
to happiness regained. In madness equilibrium is established, but 
it masks that equilibrium beneath the cloud of illusion, beneath 
feigned disorder; the rigor of the architecture is concealed 
beneath the cunning arrangement of these disordered violences. 
The sudden bursts of life, the random gestures and words, the 
wind of madness that suddenly breaks lines, shatters attitudes, 
rumples draperies—while the strings are merely being pulled 
tighter—this is the very type of baroque trompe-Foeil. Madness is 
the great trompe-Foeil in the tragicomic structures of preclassical 


44 



literature. 

This was understood by Georges de Scudery, who made his 
Comedie des comediens a theater of theater, situating his play, from 
the start, in the interacting illusions of madness. One group of 
actors takes the part of spectators, another that of actors. The 
former must pretend to take the decor for reality, the play for 
life, while in reality these actors are performing in a real decor; 
on the other hand, the latter must pretend to play the part of 
actors, while in fact, quite simply, they are actors acting. A 
double impersonation in which each element is doubled, thus 
forming that renewed exchange of the real and the illusory which 
is itself the dramatic meaning of madness. “I do not know,” 
Mondory says in the prologue to Scudery’s play, “what 
extravagance has today come over my companions, but it is so 
great that I am forced to believe that some spell has robbed them 
of their reason, and the worst of it is that they are trying to make 
me lose mine, and you yours as well. They wish to persuade me 
that I am not on a stage, that this is the city of Lyons, that over 
there is an inn, and there an innyard where actors who are not 
ourselves, yet who are, are performing a Pastoral.” In this 
extravaganza, the theater develops its truth, which is illusion. 
Which is, in the strict sense, madness. 

The classical experience of madness is born. The great threat 
that dawned on the horizon of the fifteenth century subsides, the 
disturbing powers that inhabit Bosch’s painting have lost their 
violence. Forms remain, now transparent and docile, forming a 
cortege, the inevitable procession of reason. Madness has ceased 
to be—at the limits of the world, of man and death—an 
eschatological figure; the darkness has dispersed on which the 
eyes of madness were fixed and out of which the forms of the 
impossible were born. Oblivion falls upon the world navigated by 
the free slaves of the Ship of Fools. Madness will no longer 
proceed from a point within the world to a point beyond, on its 


45 



strange voyage; it will never again be that fugitive and absolute 
limit. Behold it moored now, made fast among things and men. 
Retained and maintained. No longer a ship but a hospital. 

Scarcely a century after the career of the mad ships, we note 
the appearance of the theme of the “Hospital of Madmen,” the 
“Madhouse.” Here every empty head, fixed and classified 
according to the true reason of men, utters contradiction and 
irony, the double language of Wisdom: "... the Hospital of 
incurable Madmen, where are recited from end to end all the 
follies and fevers of the mind, by men as well as women, a task 
no less useful than enjoyable, and necessary for the acquisition of 
true wisdom.”10 Here each form of madness finds its proper 
place, its distinguishing mark, and its tutelary divinity: frenzied 
and ranting madness, symbolized by a fool astride a chair, 
struggles beneath Minerva’s gaze; the somber melancholics that 
roam the countryside, solitary and avid wolves, have as their god 
Jupiter, patron of animal metamorphoses; then come the “mad 
drunkards,” the “madmen deprived of memory and 
understanding,” the “madmen benumbed and half-dead,” the 
“madmen of giddy and empty heads” ... All this world of 
disorder, in perfect order, pronounces, each in his turn, the 
Praise of Reason. Already, in this “Hospital,” confinement has 
succeeded embarkation. 

Tamed, madness preserves all the appearances of its reign. It 
now takes part in the measures of reason and in the labor of 
truth. It plays on the surface of things and in the glitter of 
daylight, over all the workings of appearances, over the 
ambiguity of reality and illusion, over all that indeterminate web, 
ever rewoven and broken, which both unites and separates truth 
and appearance. It hides and manifests, it utters truth and 
falsehood, it is light and shadow. It shimmers, a central and 
indulgent figure, already precarious in this baroque age. 

Let us not be surprised to come upon it so often in the fictions 


46 


of the novel and the theater. Let us not be surprised to find it 
actually prowling through the streets. Thousands of times, 
Francois Colletet has met it there: 

I see, in this thoroughfare, 

A natural, followed by children 
... Consider this unhappy wretch; 

Poor mad fool, what will he do 
With so many rags and tatters?... 

I have seen such wild lunatics 
Shouting insults in the streets ... 

Madness traces a very familiar silhouette in the social 
landscape. A new and lively pleasure is taken in the old 
confraternities of madmen, in their festivals, their gatherings, 
their speeches. Men argue passionately for or against Nicolas 
Joubert, better known by the name of Angoulevent, who declares 
himself Prince of Fools, a title disputed by Valenti le Comte and 
Jacques Resneau: there follow pamphlets, a trial, arguments; his 
lawyer declares and certifies him to be “an empty head, a gutted 
gourd, lacking in common sense; a cane, a broken brain, that has 
neither spring nor whole wheel in his head.” Bluet d’ Arberes, 
who calls himself Comte de Permission, is a protege of the 
Crequis, the Lesdiguieres, the Bouillons, the Nemours; in 1602 
he publishes—or someone publishes for him—his works, in 
which he warns the reader that “he does not know how to read 
or write, and has never learned,” but that he is animated “by the 
inspiration of God and the Angels.” Pierre Dupuis, whom 
Regnier mentions in his sixth satire, is, according to 
Brascambille, “an archfool in a long robe”; he himself in his 
“Remontrance sur le reveil de Maitre Guillaume” states that he 
has “a mind elevated as far as the antechamber of the third 
degree of the moon.” And many other characters present in 
Regnier s fourteenth satire. 


47 



This world of the early seventeenth century is strangely 
hospitable, in all senses, to madness. Madness is here, at the 
heart of things and of men, an ironic sign that misplaces the 
guideposts between the real and the chimerical, barely retaining 
the memory of the great tragic threats—a life more disturbed 
than disturbing, an absurd agitation in society, the mobility of 
reason. 

But new requirements are being generated: 

A hundred and a hundred times have I taken up my lantern, 

Seeking, at high noon .. .H 


48 


II 



49 



THE GREAT 
CONFINEMENT 


Compelle intrare. 

BY a strange act of force, the classical age was to reduce to 
silence the madness whose voices the Renaissance had just 
liberated, but whose violence it had already tamed. 

It is common knowledge that the seventeenth century created 
enormous houses of confinement; it is less commonly known 
that more than one out of every hundred inhabitants of the city 
of Paris found themselves confined there, within several months. 
It is common knowledge that absolute power made use of lettres 
de cachet and arbitrary measures of imprisonment; what is less 
familiar is the judicial conscience that could inspire such 
practices. Since Pinel, Tuke, Wagnitz, we know that madmen 
were subjected to the regime of this confinement for a century 
and a half, and that they would one day be discovered in the 
wards of the Hopital General, in the cells of prisons; they would 
be found mingled with the population of the workhouses or 
Zuchthausern. But it has rarely been made clear what their status 
was there, what the meaning was of this proximity which seemed 
to assign the same homeland to the poor, to the unemployed, to 
prisoners, and to the insane. It is within the walls of confinement 
that Pinel and nineteenth-century psychiatry would come upon 
madmen; it is there—let us remember—that they would leave 
them, not without boasting of having “delivered” them. From 
the middle of the seventeenth century, madness was linked with 
this country of confinement, and with the act which designated 
confinement as its natural abode. 

A date can serve as a landmark: 1656, the decree that founded, 
in Paris, the Hopital General. At first glance, this is merely a 


50 



reform—little more than an administrative reorganization. 
Several already existing establishments are grouped under a 
single administration: the Salpetriere, rebuilt under the 
preceding reign to house an arsenal; Bicetre, which Louis XIII 
had wanted to give to the Commandery of Saint Louis as a rest 
home for military invalids; “the House and the Hospital of La 
Pitie, the larger as well as the smaller, those of Le Refuge, 
situated in the Faubourg Saint-Victor, the House and Hospital 
of Scipion, the House of La Savonnerie, with all the lands, 
places, gardens, houses, and buildings thereto appertaining.” 1 All 
were now assigned to the poor of Paris “of both sexes, of all ages 
and from all localities, of whatever breeding and birth, in 
whatever state they may be, able-bodied or invalid, sick or 
convalescent, curable or incurable.” These establishments had to 
accept, lodge, and feed those who presented themselves or those 
sent by royal or judicial authority; it was also necessary to assure 
the subsistence, the appearance, and the general order of those 
who could not find room, but who might or who deserved to be 
there. This responsibility was entrusted to directors appointed 
for life, who exercised their powers, not only in the buildings of 
the Hopital but throughout the city of Paris, over all those who 
came under their jurisdiction: “They have all power of authority, 
of direction, of administration, of commerce, of police, of 
jurisdiction, of correction and punishment over all the poor of 
Paris, both within and without the Hopital General.” The 
directors also appointed a doctor at a salary of one thousand 
livres a year; he was to reside at La Pitie, but had to visit each of 
the houses of the Hopital twice a week. 

From the very start, one thing is clear: the Hopital General is 
not a medical establishment. It is rather a sort of semijudicial 
structure, an administrative entity which, along with the already 
constituted powers, and outside of the courts, decides, judges, 
and executes. “The directors having for these purposes stakes, 


51 


irons, prisons, and dungeons in the said Hopital General and the 
places thereto appertaining so much as they deem necessary, no 
appeal will be accepted from the regulations they establish within 
the said hospital; and as for such regulations as intervene from 
without, they will be executed according to their form and tenor, 
notwithstanding opposition or whatsoever appeal made or to be 
made, and without prejudice to these, and for which, 
notwithstanding all defense or suits for justice, no distinction will 
be made.”- A quasi-absolute sovereignty, jurisdiction without 
appeal, a writ of execution against which nothing can prevail— 
the Hopital General is a strange power that the King establishes 
between the police and the courts, at the limits of the law: a third 
order of repression. The insane whom Pinel would find at 
Bicetre and at La Salpetriere belonged to this world. 

In its functioning, or in its purpose, the Hopital General had 
nothing to do with any medical concept. It was an instance of 
order, of the monarchical and bourgeois order being organized in 
France during this period. It was directly linked with the royal 
power which placed it under the authority of the civil 
government alone; the Grand Almonry of the Realm, which 
previously formed an ecclesiastical and spiritual mediation in the 
politics of assistance, was abruptly elided. The King decreed: 
“We choose to be guardian and protector of the said Hopital 
General as being of our royal founding and especially as it does 
not depend in any manner whatsoever upon our Grand Almonry, 
nor upon any of our high officers, but is to be totally exempt 
from the direction, visitation, and jurisdiction of the officers of 
the General Reform and others of the Grand Almonry, and from 
all others to whom we forbid all knowledge and jurisdiction in 
any fashion or manner whatsoever.” The origin of the project 
had been parliamentary, and the first two administrative heads 
appointed were the first President of the Parlement and the 
Procurator General. But they were soon supplemented by the 


52 


Archbishop of Paris, the President of the Court of Assistance, 
the President of the Court of Exchequer, the Chief of Police, 
and the Provost of Merchants. Henceforth the “Grand Bureau” 
had no more than a deliberative role. The actual administration 
and the real responsibilities were entrusted to agents recruited by 
co-optation. These were the true governors, the delegates of 
royal power and bourgeois fortune to the world of poverty. The 
Revolution was able to give them this testimony: “Chosen from 
the best families of the bourgeoisie,... they brought to their 
administration disinterested views and pure intentions.”3 

This structure proper to the monarchical and bourgeois order 
of France, contemporary with its organization in absolutist 
forms, soon extended its network over the whole of France. An 
edict of the King, dated June 16, 1676, prescribed the 
establishment of an “hopital general in each city of his kingdom.” 
Occasionally the measure had been anticipated by the local 
authorities; the bourgeoisie of Fyons had already organized in 
1612 a charity establishment that functioned in an analogous 
manner. The Archbishop of Tours was proud to declare on July 
10, 1676, that his “archepiscopal city has happily foreseen the 
pious intentions of the King and erected an hopital general called 
Fa Charite even before the one in Paris, whose order has served 
as a model for all those subsequently established, within or 
outside the kingdom.” The Charite of Tours, in fact, had been 
founded in 1656, and the King had endowed it with an income 
of four thousand livres. Over the entire face of France, hopitaux 
generaux were opened; on the eve of the Revolution, they were to 
be found in thirty-two provincial cities. 

Even if it had been deliberately excluded from the 
organization of the hopitaux generaux —by complicity, doubtless, 
between royal power and bourgeoisie—the Church nonetheless 
did not remain a stranger to the movement. It reformed its own 
hospital institutions, redistributed the wealth of its foundations, 


53 



even created congregations whose purposes were rather 
analogous to those of the Hopital General. Vincent de Paul 
reorganized Saint-Lazare, the most important of the former lazar 
houses of Paris; on January 7, 1632, he signed a contract in the 
name of the Congregationists of the Mission with the “Priory” of 
Saint-Lazare, which was now to receive “persons detained by 
order of His Majesty.” The Order of Good Sons opened 
hospitals of this nature in the north of France. The Brothers of 
Saint John of God, called into France in 1602, founded first the 
Charite of Paris in the Faubourg Saint-Germain, then 
Charenton, into which they moved on May 10, 1645. Not far 
from Paris, they also operated the Charite of Senlis, which 
opened on October 27, 1670. Some years before, the Duchess of 
Bouillon had donated them the buildings and benefices of La 
Maladrerie, founded in the fourteenth century by Thibaut de 
Champagne, at Chateau-Thierry. They administered also the 
Charites of Saint-Yon, Pontorson, Cadillac, and Romans. In 
1699, the Lazarists founded in Marseilles the establishment that 
was to become the Hopital Saint-Pierre. Then, in the eighteenth 
century, came Armentieres (1712), Mareville (1714), the Good 
Savior of Caen (1735); Saint-Meins of Rennes opened shortly 
before the Revolution (1780). 

The phenomenon has European dimensions. The constitution 
of an absolute monarchy and the intense Catholic renaissance 
during the Counter-Reformation produced in France a very 
particular character of simultaneous competition and complicity 
between the government and the Church. Elsewhere it assumed 
quite different forms; but its localization in time was just as 
precise. The great hospitals, houses of confinement, 
establishments of religion and public order, of assistance and 
punishment, of governmental charity and welfare measures, are a 
phenomenon of the classical period: as universal as itself and 
almost contemporary with its birth. In German-speaking 
countries, it was marked by the creation of houses of correction, 


54 



the Zucht-hausern\ the first antedates the French houses of 
confinement (except for the Charite of Lyons); it opened in 
Hamburg around 1620. The others were founded in the second 
half of the century: Basel (1667), Breslau (1668), Frankfort 
(1684), Spandau (1684), Konigsberg (1691). They continued to 
multiply in the eighteenth century; Leipzig first in 1701, then 
Halle and Cassel in 1717 and 1720, later Brieg and Osnabriick 
(1756), and finally Torgau in 1771. 

In England the origins of confinement are more remote. An 
act of 1575 covering both “the punishment of vagabonds and the 
relief of the poor” prescribed the construction of houses oj 
correction , to number at least one per county. Their upkeep was 
to be assured by a tax, but the public was encouraged to make 
voluntary donations. It appears, however, that in this form the 
measure was scarcely ever applied, since, some years later, it was 
decided to authorize private enterprise: it was no longer 
necessary to obtain an official permit to open a hospital or a 
house of correction; anyone who pleased might do so. At the 
beginning of the seventeenth century, a general reorganization: a 
fine of five pounds was imposed on any justice of the peace who 
had not established one in the area of his jurisdiction; the houses 
were to install trades, workshops, and factories (milling, 
spinning, weaving) to aid in their upkeep and assure their 
inmates of work; a judge was to decide who was qualified to be 
sent there. The development of these “bridewells” was not too 
considerable; often they were gradually absorbed by the prisons 
to which they were attached; the practice never spread as far as 
Scotland. On the other hand, the workhouses were destined to 
greater success. They date from the second half of the 
seventeenth century. An act of 1670 defined their status, 
appointed officers of justice to oversee the collection of taxes and 
the administration of sums that would permit their functioning, 
and entrusted the supreme control of their administration to a 
justice of the peace. In 1697 several parishes of Bristol united to 


55 



form the first workhouse in England, and to designate the 
corporation that would administer it. Another was established at 
Worcester in 1703, a third the same year at Dublin; then at 
Plymouth, Norwich, Hull, and Exeter. By the end of the 
eighteenth century, there were 126 of them. The Gilbert Act of 
1792 gives the parishes facilities to create new ones; at the same 
time, the control and authority of the justice of the peace is 
reinforced; to keep the workhouses from becoming hospitals, it is 
recommended that all contagious invalids be turned away. 

In several years, an entire network had spread across Europe. 
John Howard, at the end of the eighteenth century, undertook to 
investigate it; in England, Holland, Germany, France, Italy, 
Spain, he made pilgrimages to all the chief centers of 
confinement—“hospitals, prisons, jails”—and his philanthropy 
was outraged by the fact that the same walls could contain those 
condemned by common law, young men who disturbed their 
families’ peace or who squandered their goods, people without 
profession, and the insane. Proof that even at this period, a 
certain meaning had been lost: that which had so hastily, so 
spontaneously summoned into being all over Europe the 
category of classical order we call confinement. In a hundred and 
fifty years, confinement had become the abusive amalgam of 
heterogeneous elements. Yet at its origin, there must have 
existed a unity which justified its urgency; between these diverse 
forms and the classical period that called them into being, there 
must have been a principle of cohesion we cannot evade under 
the scandal of pre-Revolutionary sensibility. What, then, was the 
reality represented by this entire population which almost 
overnight found itself shut up, excluded more severely than the 
lepers? We must not forget that a few years after its foundation, 
the Hopital General of Paris alone contained six thousand 
persons, or around one per cent of the population. There must 
have formed, silently and doubtless over the course of many 
years, a social sensibility, common to European culture, that 


56 



suddenly began to manifest itself in the second half of the 
seventeenth century; it was this sensibility that suddenly isolated 
the category destined to populate the places of confinement. To 
inhabit the reaches long since abandoned by the lepers, they 
chose a group that to our eyes is strangely mixed and confused. 
But what is for us merely an undifferentiated sensibility must 
have been, for those living in the classical age, a clearly 
articulated perception. It is this mode of perception which we 
must investigate in order to discover the form of sensibility to 
madness in an epoch we are accustomed to define by the 
privileges of Reason. The act which, by tracing the locus of 
confinement, conferred upon it its power of segregation and 
provided a new homeland for madness, though it may be 
coherent and concerted, is not simple. It organizes into a 
complex unity a new sensibility to poverty and to the duties of 
assistance, new forms of reaction to the economic problems of 
unemployment and idleness, a new ethic of work, and also the 
dream of a city where moral obligation was joined to civil law, 
within the authoritarian forms of constraint. Obscurely, these 
themes are present during the construction of the cities of 
confinement and their organization. They give a meaning to this 
ritual, and explain in part the mode in which madness was 
perceived, and experienced, by the classical age. 

Confinement, that massive phenomenon, the signs of which 
are found all across eighteenth-century Europe, is a “police” 
matter. Police, in the precise sense that the classical epoch gave 
to it—that is, the totality of measures which make work possible 
and necessary for all those who could not live without it; the 
question Voltaire would soon formulate, Colbert’s 
contemporaries had already asked: “Since you have established 
yourselves as a people, have you not yet discovered the secret of 
forcing all the rich to make all the poor work? Are you still 
ignorant of the first principles of the police?” 


57 



Before having the medical meaning we give it, or that at least 
we like to suppose it has, confinement was required by 
something quite different from any concern with curing the sick. 
What made it necessary was an imperative of labor. Our 
philanthropy prefers to recognize the signs of a benevolence 
toward sickness where there is only a condemnation of idleness. 

Let us return to the first moments of the “Confinement,” and 
to that royal edict of April 27, 1656, that led to the creation of 
the Hopital General. From the beginning, the institution set 
itself the task of preventing “mendicancy and idleness as the 
source of all disorders.” In fact, this was the last of the great 
measures that had been taken since the Renaissance to put an 
end to unemployment or at least to begging.4 In 1532, the 
Parlement of Paris decided to arrest beggars and force them to 
work in the sewers of the city, chained in pairs. The situation 
soon reached critical proportions: on March 23, 1534, the order 
was given “to poor scholars and indigents” to leave the city, while 
it was forbidden “henceforth to sing hymns before images in the 
streets.” The wars of religion multiplied this suspect crowd, 
which included peasants driven from their farms, disbanded 
soldiers or deserters, unemployed workers, impoverished 
students, and the sick. When Henri IV began the siege of Paris, 
the city, which had less than 100,000 inhabitants, contained 
more than 30,000 beggars. An economic revival began early in 
the seventeenth century; it was decided to reabsorb by force the 
unemployed who had not regained a place in society; a decree of 
the Parlement dated 1606 ordered the beggars of Paris to be 
whipped in the public square, branded on the shoulder, shorn, 
and then driven from the city; to keep them from returning, an 
ordinance of 1607 established companies of archers at all the city 
gates to forbid entry to indigents. When the effects of the 
economic renaissance disappeared with the Thirty Years’ War, 
the problems of mendicancy and idleness reappeared; until the 


58 


middle of the century, the regular increase of taxes hindered 
manufactures and augmented unemployment. This was the 
period of uprisings in Paris (1621), in Lyons (1652), in Rouen 
(1639). At the same time, the world of labor was disorganized by 
the appearance of new economic structures; as the large 
manufactories developed, the guilds lost their powers and their 
rights, the “General Regulations” prohibited all assemblies of 
workers, all leagues, all “associations.” In many-professions, 
however, the guilds were reconstituted. They were prosecuted, 
but it seems that the Parlements showed a certain apathy; the 
Parlement of Normandy disclaimed all competence to judge the 
rioters of Rouen. This is doubtless why the Church intervened 
and accused the workers’ secret gatherings of sorcery. A decree of 
the Sorbonne, in 1655, proclaimed “guilty of sacrilege and mortal 
sin” all those who were found in such bad company. 

In this silent conflict that opposed the severity of the Church 
to the indulgence of the Parlements, the creation of the Hopital 
was certainly, at least in the beginning, a victory for the 
Parlement. It was, in any case, a new solution. For the first time, 
purely negative measures of exclusion were replaced by a measure 
of confinement; the unemployed person was no longer driven 
away or punished; he was taken in charge, at the expense of the 
nation but at the cost of his individual liberty. Between him and 
society, an implicit system of obligation was established: he had 
the right to be fed, but he must accept the physical and moral 
constraint of confinement. 

It is this entire, rather undifferentiated mass at which the edict 
of 1657 is aimed: a population without resources, without social 
moorings, a class rejected or rendered mobile by new economic 
developments. Less than two weeks after it was signed, the edict 
was read and proclaimed in the streets. Paragraph 9: “We 
expressly prohibit and forbid all persons of either sex, of any 
locality and of any age, of whatever breeding and birth, and in 
whatever condition they may be, able-bodied or invalid, sick or 


59 



convalescent, curable or incurable, to beg in the city and suburbs 
of Paris, neither in the churches, nor at the doors of such, nor at 
the doors of houses nor in the streets, nor anywhere else in 
public, nor in secret, by day or night ... under pain of being 
whipped for the first offense, and for the second condemned to 
the galleys if men and boys, banished if women and girls.” The 
year after—Sunday, May 13, 1657—a high mass in honor of the 
Holy Ghost was sung at the Church of Saint-Louis de la Pitie, 
and on the morning of Monday the fourteenth, the militia, 
which was to become, in the mythology of popular terror, “the 
archers of the Hopital,” began to hunt down beggars and herd 
them into the different buildings of the Hopital. Four years later, 
La Salpetriere housed 1,460 women and small children; at La 
Pitie there were 98 boys, 897 girls between seven and seventeen, 
and 95 women; at Bicetre, 1,615 adult men; at La Savonnerie, 
305 boys between eight and thirteen; finally, Scipion lodged 530 
pregnant women, nursing women, and very young children. 
Initially, married people, even in need, were not admitted; the 
administration was instructed to feed them at home; but soon, 
thanks to a grant from Mazarin, it was possible to lodge them at 
La Salpetriere. In all, between five and six thousand persons. 

Throughout Europe, confinement had the same meaning, at 
least if we consider its origin. It constituted one of the answers 
the seventeenth century gave to an economic crisis that affected 
the entire Western world: reduction of wages, unemployment, 
scarcity of coin—the coincidence of these phenomena probably 
being due to a crisis in the Spanish economy. Even England, of 
all the countries of Western Europe the least dependent on the 
system, had to solve the same problems. Despite all the measures 
taken to avoid unemployment and the reduction of wages, 
poverty continued to spread in the nation. In 1622 appeared a 
pamphlet, Grievous Groan for the Poor , attributed to Thomas 
Dekker, which, emphasizing the danger, condemns the general 
negligence: “Though the number of the poor do daily increase, 


60 



all things yet worketh for the worst in their behalf;... many of 
these parishes turneth forth their poor, yea, and their lusty 
labourers that will not work ... to beg, filch, and steal for their 
maintenance, so that the country is pitifully pestered with them.” 
It was feared that they would overrun the country, and since they 
could not, as on the Continent, cross the border into another 
nation, it was proposed that they be “banished and conveyed to 
the New-found Land, the East and West Indies.” In 1630, the 
King established a commission to assure the rigorous observance 
of the Poor Laws. That same year, it published a series of “orders 
and directions”; it recommended prosecuting beggars and 
vagabonds, as well as “all those who live in idleness and will not 
work for reasonable wages or who spend what they have in 
taverns.” They must be punished according to law and placed in 
houses of correction; as for those with wives and children, 
investigation must be made as to whether they were married and 
their children baptized, “for these people live like savages 
without being married, nor buried, nor baptized; and it is this 
licentious liberty which causes so many to rejoice in 
vagabondage.” Despite the recovery that began in England in the 
middle of the century, the problem was still unsolved in 
Cromwelfs time, for the Lord Mayor complains of “this vermin 
that troops about the city, disturbing public order, assaulting 
carriages, demanding alms with loud cries at the doors of 
churches and private houses.” 

For a long time, the house of correction or the premises of the 
Hopital General would serve to contain the unemployed, the 
idle, and vagabonds. Each time a crisis occurred and the number 
of the poor sharply increased, the houses of confinement 
regained, at least for a time, their initial economic significance. 
In the middle of the eighteenth century, there was another great 
crisis: 12,000 begging workers at Rouen and as many at Tours; at 
Lyons the manufactories closed. The Count d’Argenson, “who 
commands the department of Paris and the marshalseas,” gave 


61 



orders “to arrest all the beggars of the kingdom; the marshalseas 
will perform this task in the countryside, while the same thing is 
done in Paris, whither they are sure not to return, being 
entrapped on all sides.” 

But outside of the periods of crisis, confinement acquired 
another meaning. Its repressive function was combined with a 
new use. It was no longer merely a question of confining those 
out of work, but of giving work to those who had been confined 
and thus making them contribute to the prosperity of all. The 
alternation is clear: cheap manpower in the periods of full 
employment and high salaries; and in periods of unemployment, 
reabsorption of the idle and social protection against agitation 
and uprisings. Let us not forget that the first houses of 
confinement appear in England in the most industrialized parts 
of the country: Worcester, Norwich, Bristol; that the first hopital 
general was opened in Lyons, forty years before that of Paris; that 
Hamburg was the first German city to have its Zuchthaus , in 
1620. Its regulations, published in 1622, were quite precise. The 
internees must all work. Exact record was kept of the value of 
their work, and they were paid a fourth of it. For work was not 
only an occupation; it must be productive. The eight directors of 
the house established a general plan. The Werkmeister assigned a 
task to each, and ascertained at the end of the week that it had 
been accomplished. The rule of work would remain in effect 
until the end of the eighteenth century, since John Howard could 
still attest that they were “knitting and spinning; weaving 
stockings, linen, hair, and wool—and rasping logwood and 
hartshorn. The quota of a robust man who shreds such wood is 
forty-five pounds a day. Some men and horses labour at a 
fulling-mill. A blacksmith works there without cease.” Each 
house of confinement in Germany had its specialty: spinning was 
paramount in Bremen, Brunswick, Munich, Breslau, Berlin; 
weaving in Hanover. The men shredded wood in Bremen and 
Hamburg. In Nuremberg they polished optical glass; at Mainz 


62 



the principal labor was the milling of flour. 

The first houses of correction were opened in England during 
a full economic recession. The act of 1610 recommended only 
joining certain mills and weaving and carding shops to all houses 
of correction in order to occupy the pensioners. But what had 
been a moral requirement became an economic tactic when 
commerce and industry recovered after 1651, the economic 
situation having been re-established by the Navigation Act and 
the lowering of the discount rate. All able-bodied manpower was 
to be used to the best advantage, that is, as cheaply as possible. 
When John Carey established his workhouse project in Bristol, 
he ranked the need for work first: “The poor of both 
sexes ... may be employed in beating hemp, dressing and 
spinning flax, or in carding wool and cotton.” At Worcester, they 
manufactured clothes and stuffs; a workshop for children was 
established. All of which did not always proceed without 
difficulties. It was suggested that the workhouses might enter the 
local industries and markets, on the principle perhaps that such 
cheap production would have a regulatory effect on the sale 
price. But the manufactories protested. Daniel Defoe noticed 
that by the effect of the too easy competition of the workhouses, 
poverty was created in one area on the pretext of suppressing it in 
another; “it is giving to one what you take away from another; 
putting a vagabond in an honest man’s employment, and putting 
diligence on the tenters to find out some other work to maintain 
his family.” Faced with this danger of competition, the 
authorities let the work gradually disappear. The pensioners 
could no longer earn even enough to pay for their upkeep; at 
times it was necessary to put them in prison so that they might at 
least have free bread. As for the bridewells, as Howard attested, 
there were few “in which any work is done, or can be done. The 
prisoners have neither tools, nor materials of any kind: but spend 
their time in sloth, profaneness and debauchery.” 

When the Hopital General was created in Paris, it was 


63 



intended above all to suppress beggary, rather than to provide an 
occupation for the internees. It seems, however, that Colbert, 
like his English contemporaries, regarded assistance through 
work as both a remedy to unemployment and a stimulus to the 
development of manufactories. In any case, in the provinces the 
directors were to see that the houses of charity had a certain 
economic significance. “All the poor who are capable of working 
must, upon work days, do what is necessary to avoid idleness, 
which is the mother of all evils, as well as to accustom them to 
honest toil and also to earning some part of their sustenance.” 

Sometimes there were even arrangements which permitted 
private entrepreneurs to utilize the manpower of the asylums for 
their own profit. It was stipulated, for example, according to an 
agreement made in 1708, that an entrepreneur should furnish 
the Charite of Tulle with wool, soap, and coal, and in return the 
establishment would redeliver the wool carded and spun. The 
profit was divided between the entrepreneur and the hospital. 
Even in Paris, several attempts were made to transform the 
buildings of the Hopital General into factories. If we can believe 
the author of an anonymous memoire that appeared in 1790, at 
La Pitie “all the varieties of manufacture that could be offered to 
the capital” were attempted; finally, “in a kind of despair, a 
manufacture was undertaken of a sort of lacing found to be the 
least costly.” Elsewhere, such efforts were scarcely more fruitful. 
Numerous efforts were made at Bicetre: manufacture of thread 
and rope, mirror polishing, and especially the famous “great 
well.” An attempt was even made, in 1781, to substitute teams of 
prisoners for the horses that brought up the water, in relay from 
five in the morning to eight at night: “What reason could have 
determined this strange occupation? Was it that of economy or 
simply the necessity of busying the prisoners? If the latter, would 
it not have been better to occupy them with work more useful 
both for them and for the hospital? If for reasons of economy, we 


64 



are a long way from finding any.” During the entire eighteenth 
century, the economic significance Colbert wanted to give the 
Hopital General continued to recede; that center of forced labor 
would become a place of privileged idleness. “What is the source 
of the disorders at Bicetre?” the men of the Revolution were 
again to ask. And they would supply the answer that had already 
been given in the seventeenth century: “It is idleness. What is the 
means of remedying it? Work.” 

The classical age used confinement in an equivocal manner, 
making it play a double role: to reabsorb unemployment, or at 
least eliminate its most visible social effects, and to control costs 
when they seemed likely to become too high; to act alternately 
on the manpower market and on the cost of production. As it 
turned out, it does not seem that the houses of confinement were 
able to play effectively the double role that was expected of them. 
If they absorbed the unemployed, it was mostly to mask their 
poverty, and to avoid the social or political disadvantages of 
agitation; but at the very moment the unemployed were herded 
into forced-labor shops, unemployment increased in neighboring 
regions or in similar areas. As for the effect on production costs, 
it could only be artificial, the market price of such products being 
disproportionate to the cost of manufacture, calculated according 
to the expenses occasioned by confinement itself. 

Measured by their functional value alone, the creation of the 
houses of confinement can be regarded as a failure. Their 
disappearance throughout Europe, at the beginning of the 
nineteenth century, as receiving centers for the indigent and 
prisons of poverty, was to sanction their ultimate failure: a 
transitory and ineffectual remedy, a social precaution clumsily 
formulated by a nascent industrialization. And yet, in this very 
failure, the classical period conducted an irreducible experiment. 
What appears to us today as a clumsy dialectic of production and 
prices then possessed its real meaning as a certain ethical 


65 


consciousness of labor, in which the difficulties of the economic 
mechanisms lost their urgency in favor of an affirmation of value. 

In this first phase of the industrial world, labor did not seem 
linked to the problems it was to provoke; it was regarded, on the 
contrary, as a general solution, an infallible panacea, a remedy to 
all forms of poverty. Labor and poverty were located in a simple 
opposition, in inverse proportion to each other. As for that 
power, its special characteristic, of abolishing poverty, labor— 
according to the classical interpretation—possessed it not so 
much by its productive capacity as by a certain force of moral 
enchantment. Labor’s effectiveness was acknowledged because it 
was based on an ethical transcendence. Since the Fall, man had 
accepted labor as a penance and for its power to work 
redemption. It was not a law of nature which forced man to 
work, but the effect of a curse. The earth was innocent of that 
sterility in which it would slumber if man remained idle: “The 
land had not sinned, and if it is accursed, it is by the labor of the 
fallen man who cultivates it; from it no fruit is won, particularly 
the most necessary fruit, save by force and continual labor.”6 

The obligation to work was not linked to any confidence in 
nature; and it was not even through an obscure loyalty that the 
land would reward man’s labor. The theme was constant among 
Catholic thinkers, as among the Protestants, that labor does not 
bear its own fruits. Produce and wealth were not found at the 
term of a dialectic of labor and nature. Here is Calvin’s 
admonition: “Nor do we believe, according as men will be 
vigilant and skillful, according as they will have done their duty 
well, that they can make their land fertile; it is the benediction of 
God which governs all things.” And this danger of a labor which 
would remain sterile if God did not intervene in His infinite 
mercy is acknowledged in turn by Bossuet: “At each moment, 
the hope of the harvest and the unique fruit of all our labors may 
escape us; we are at the mercy of the inconstant heavens that 


66 


bring down rain upon the tender ears.” This precarious labor to 
which nature is never obliged to respond—save by the special 
will of God—is nonetheless obligatory in all strictness: not on 
the level of natural syntheses, but on the level of moral syntheses. 
The poor man who, without consenting to “torment” the land, 
waits until God comes to his aid, since He has promised to feed 
the birds of the sky, would be disobeying the great law of 
Scripture: “Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.” Does not 
reluctance to work mean “trying beyond measure the power of 
God,” as Calvin says? It is seeking to constrain the miracle, 7 
whereas the miracle is granted daily to man as the gratuitous 
reward of his labor. If it is true that labor is not inscribed among 
the laws of nature, it is enveloped in the order of the fallen 
world. This is why idleness is rebellion—the worst form of all, in 
a sense: it waits for nature to be generous as in the innocence of 
Eden, and seeks to constrain a Goodness to which man cannot 
lay claim since Adam. Pride was the sin of man before the Fall; 
but the sin of idleness is the supreme pride of man once he has 
fallen, the absurd pride of poverty. In our world, where the land 
is no longer fertile except in thistles and weeds, idleness is the 
fault par excellence. In the Middle Ages, the great sin, radix 
malorum omnium, was pride, Superbia. According to Johan 
Huizinga, there was a time, at the dawn of the Renaissance, 
when the supreme sin assumed the aspect of Avarice, Dante’s 
cicca cupidigia. All the seventeenth-century texts, on the contrary, 
announced the infernal triumph of Sloth: it was sloth which led 
the round of the vices and swept them on. Let us not forget that 
according to the edict of its creation, the Hopital General must 
prevent “mendicancy and idleness as sources of all disorder.” 
Louis Bourdaloue echoes these condemnations of sloth, the 
wretched pride of fallen man: “What, then, is the disorder of an 
idle life? It is, replies Saint Ambrose, in its true meaning a 
second rebellion of the creature against God.” Labor in the 


67 


houses of confinement thus assumed its ethical meaning: since 
sloth had become the absolute form of rebellion, the idle would 
be forced to work, in the endless leisure of a labor without utility 
or profit. 

It was in a certain experience of labor that the indissociably 
economic and moral demand for confinement was formulated. 
Between labor and idleness in the classical world ran a line of 
demarcation that replaced the exclusion of leprosy. The asylum 
was substituted for the lazar house, in the geography of haunted 
places as in the landscape of the moral universe. The old rites of 
excommunication were revived, but in the world of production 
and commerce. It was in these places of doomed and despised 
idleness, in this space invented by a society which had derived an 
ethical transcendence from the law of work, that madness would 
appear and soon expand until it had annexed them. A day was to 
come when it could possess these sterile reaches of idleness by a 
sort of very old and very dim right of inheritance. The 
nineteenth century would consent, would even insist that to the 
mad and to them alone be transferred these lands on which, a 
hundred and fifty years before, men had sought to pen the poor, 
the vagabond, the unemployed. 

It is not immaterial that madmen were included in the 
proscription of idleness. From its origin, they would have their 
place beside the poor, deserving or not, and the idle, voluntary or 
not. Like them, they would be subject to the rules of forced 
labor. More than once, in fact, they figured in their singular 
fashion within this uniform constraint. In the workshops in 
which they were interned, they distinguished themselves by their 
inability to work and to follow the rhythms of collective life. The 
necessity, discovered in the eighteenth century, to provide a 
special regime for the insane, and the great crisis of confinement 
that shortly preceded the Revolution, are linked to the experience 
of madness available in the universal necessity of labor. Men did 
not wait until the seventeenth century to “shut up” the mad, but 


68 



it was in this period that they began to “confine” or “intern” 
them, along with an entire population with whom their kinship 
was recognized. Until the Renaissance, the sensibility to madness 
was linked to the presence of imaginary transcendences. In the 
classical age, for the first time, madness was perceived through a 
condemnation of idleness and in a social immanence guaranteed 
by the community of labor. This community acquired an ethical 
power of segregation, which permitted it to eject, as into another 
world, all forms of social uselessness. It was in this other world , 
encircled by the sacred powers of labor, that madness would 
assume the status we now attribute to it. If there is, in classical 
madness, something which refers elsewhere, and to other things , 
it is no longer because the madman comes from the world of the 
irrational and bears its stigmata; rather, it is because he crosses 
the frontiers of bourgeois order of his own accord, and alienates 
himself outside the sacred limits of its ethic. 

In fact, the relation between the practice of confinement and 
the insistence on work is not defined by economic conditions; far 
from it. A moral perception sustains and animates it. When the 
Board of Trade published its report on the poor in which it 
proposed the means “to render them useful to the public,” it was 
made quite clear that the origin of poverty was neither scarcity of 
commodities nor unemployment, but “the weakening of 
discipline and the relaxation of morals.” The edict of 1657, too, 
was full of moral denunciations and strange threats. “The 
libertinage of beggars has risen to excess because of an 
unfortunate tolerance of crimes of all sorts, which attract the 
curse of God upon the State when they remain unpunished.” 
This “libertinage” is not the kind that can be defined in relation 
to the great law of work, but a moral libertinage: “Experience 
having taught those persons who are employed in charitable 
occupations that many among them of either sex live together 
without marriage, that many of their children are unbaptized, 
and that almost all of them live in ignorance of religion, 


69 



disdaining the sacraments, and continually practicing all sorts of 
vice.” Hence the Hopital does not have the appearance of a mere 
refuge for those whom age, infirmity, or sickness keep from 
working; it will have not only the aspect of a forced labor camp, 
but also that of a moral institution responsible for punishing, for 
correcting a certain moral “abeyance” which does not merit the 
tribunal of men, but cannot be corrected by the severity of 
penance alone. The Hopital General has an ethical status. It is 
this moral charge which invests its directors, and they are 
granted every judicial apparatus and means of repression: “They 
have power of authority, of direction, of administration, of 
commerce, of police, of jurisdiction, of correction and 
punishment”; and to accomplish this task “stakes, irons, prisons, 
and dungeons”8 are put at their disposal. 

And it is in this context that the obligation to work assumes 
its meaning as both ethical exercise and moral guarantee. It will 
serve as askesis , as punishment, as symptom of a certain 
disposition of the heart. The prisoner who could and who would 
work would be released, not so much because he was again useful 
to society, but because he had again subscribed to the great 
ethical pact of human existence. In April 1684, a decree created 
within the Hopital a section for boys and girls under twenty-five; 
it specified that work must occupy the greater part of the day, 
and must be accompanied by “the reading of pious books.” But 
the ruling defines the purely repressive nature of this work, 
beyond any concern for production: “They will be made to work 
as long and as hard as their strengths and situations will permit.” 
It is then, but only then, that they can be taught an occupation 
“fitting their sex and inclination,” insofar as the measure of their 
zeal in the first activities makes it possible to “judge that they 
desire to reform.” Finally, every fault “will be punished by 
reduction of gruel, by increase of work, by imprisonment and 
other punishments customary in the said hospitals, as the 


70 


directors shall see fit.” It is enough to read the “general 
regulations for daily life in the House of Saint-Louis de la 
Salpetriere” to understand that the very requirement of labor was 
instituted as an exercise in moral reform and constraint, which 
reveals, if not the ultimate meaning, at least the essential 
justification of confinement. 

An important phenomenon, this invention of a site of 
constraint, where morality castigates by means of administrative 
enforcement. For the first time, institutions of morality are 
established in which an astonishing synthesis of moral obligation 
and civil law is effected. The law of nations will no longer 
countenance the disorder of hearts. To be sure, this is not the 
first time in European culture that moral error, even in its most 
private form, has assumed the aspect of a transgression against 
the written or unwritten laws of the community. But in this great 
confinement of the classical age, the essential thing—and the 
new event—is that men were confined in cities of pure morality, 
where the law that should reign in all hearts was to be applied 
without compromise, without concession, in the rigorous forms 
of physical constraint. Morality permitted itself to be 
administered like trade or economy. 

Thus we see inscribed in the institutions of absolute monarchy 
—in the very ones that long remained the symbol of its arbitrary 
power—the great bourgeois, and soon republican, idea that 
virtue, too, is an affair of state, that decrees can be published to 
make it flourish, that an authority can be established to make 
sure it is respected. The walls of confinement actually enclose the 
negative of that moral city of which the bourgeois conscience 
began to dream in the seventeenth century; a moral city for those 
who sought, from the start, to avoid it, a city where right reigns 
only by virtue of a force without appeal—a sort of sovereignty of 
good, in which intimidation alone prevails and the only 
recompense of virtue (to this degree its own reward) is to escape 
punishment. In the shadows of the bourgeois city is born this 


71 



strange republic of the good which is imposed by force on all 
those suspected of belonging to evil. This is the underside of the 
bourgeoisie’s great dream and great preoccupation in the classical 
age: the laws of the State and the laws of the heart at last 
identical. “Let our politicians leave off their calculations ... let 
them learn once and for all that everything can be had for 
money, except morals and citizens.”9 

Is this not the dream that seems to have haunted the founders 
of the house of confinement in Hamburg? One of the directors is 
to see that “all in the house are properly instructed as to religious 
and moral duties.... The schoolmaster must instruct the children 
in religion, and encourage them, at proper times, to learn and 
repeat portions of Scripture. He must also teach them reading, 
writing and accounts, and a decent behaviour to those that visit 
the house. He must take care that they attend divine service, and 

are orderly at it.” In England, the workhouse regulations 
devote much space to the surveillance of morals and to religious 
education. Thus for the house in Plymouth, a schoolmaster is to 
be appointed who will fulfill the triple requirement of being 
“pious, sober, and discreet.” Every morning and evening, at the 
prescribed hour, it will be his task to preside at prayers; every 
Saturday afternoon and on holidays, he will address the inmates, 
exhorting and instructing them in “the fundamental parts of the 
Protestant religion, according to the doctrine of the Church of 
England.” Hamburg or Plymouth, Zuchthausern and workhouses 
—throughout Protestant Europe, fortresses of moral order were 
constructed, in which were taught religion and whatever was 
necessary to the peace of the State. 

In Catholic countries, the goal is the same but the religious 
imprint is a little more marked, as the work of Saint Vincent de 
Paul bears witness. “The principal end for which such persons 
have been removed here, out of the storms of the great world, 
and introduced into this solitude as pensioners, is entirely to 


72 


keep them from the slavery of sin, from being eternally damned, 
and to give them means to rejoice in a perfect contentment in 
this world and in the next; they will do all they can to worship, in 
this world, Divine Providence.... Experience convinces us only 
too unhappily that the source of the misrule triumphant today 
among the young lies entirely in the lack of instruction and of 
obedience in spiritual matters, since they much prefer to follow 
their evil inclinations than the holy inspiration of God and the 
charitable advice of their parents.”11 Therefore the pensioners 
must be delivered from a world which, for their weakness, is only 
an invitation to sin, must be recalled to a solitude where they will 
have as companions only their “guardian angels” incarnate in the 
daily presence of their warders: these latter, in fact, “render them 
the same good offices that their guardian angels perform for 
them invisibly: namely, instruct them, console them, and procure 
their salvation.” In the houses of La Charite, the greatest 
attention was paid to this ordering of life and conscience, which 
throughout the eighteenth century would more and more clearly 
appear as the raison d'etre of confinement. In 1765, new 
regulations were established for the Charite of Chateau-Thierry; 
it was made quite clear that “the Prior will visit all the prisoners 
at least once a week, one after the other, and separately, to 
console them, to exhort them to better conduct, and to assure 
himself that they are treated as they should be; the subordinate 
officer will do this every day.” 

All these prisons of moral order might have borne the motto 
which Howard could still read on the one in Mainz: “If wild 
beasts can be broken to the yoke, it must not be despaired of 
correcting the man who has strayed.” For the Catholic Church, 
as in the Protestant countries, confinement represents, in the 
form of an authoritarian model, the myth of social happiness: a 
police whose order will be entirely transparent to the principles 
of religion, and a religion whose requirements will be satisfied, 


73 


without restrictions, by the regulations of the police and the 
constraints with which it can be armed. There is, in these 
institutions, an attempt of a kind to demonstrate that order may 
be adequate to virtue. In this sense, “confinement” conceals both 
a metaphysics of government and a politics of religion; it is 
situated, as an effort of tyrannical synthesis, in the vast space 
separating the garden of God and the cities which men, driven 
from paradise, have built with their own hands. The house of 
confinement in the classical age constitutes the densest symbol of 
that “police” which conceived of itself as the civil equivalent of 
religion for the edification of a perfect city. 

Confinement was an institutional creation peculiar to the 
seventeenth century. It acquired from the first an importance 
that left it no rapport with imprisonment as practiced in the 
Middle Ages. As an economic measure and a social precaution, it 
had the value of inventiveness. But in the history of unreason, it 
marked a decisive event: the moment when madness was 
perceived on the social horizon of poverty, of incapacity for 
work, of inability to integrate with the group; the moment when 
madness began to rank among the problems of the city. The new 
meanings assigned to poverty, the importance given to the 
obligation to work, and all the ethical values that are linked to 
labor, ultimately determined the experience of madness and 
inflected its course. 

A sensibility was born which had drawn a line and laid a 
cornerstone, and which chose—only to banish. The concrete 
space of classical society reserved a neutral region, a blank page 
where the real life of the city was suspended; here, order no 
longer freely confronted disorder, reason no longer tried to make 
its own way among all that might evade or seek to deny it. Here 
reason reigned in the pure state, in a triumph arranged for it in 
advance over a frenzied unreason. Madness was thus torn from 
that imaginary freedom which still allowed it to flourish on the 


74 



Renaissance horizon. Not so long ago, it had floundered about in 
broad daylight: in King Lear , in Don Quixote. But in less than a 
half-century, it had been sequestered and, in the fortress of 
confinement, bound to Reason, to the rules of morality and to 
their monotonous nights. 


75 



Ill 



76 


THE INSANE 


FROM the creation of the Hopital General, from the opening, 
in Germany and in England, of the first houses of correction, 
and until the end of the eighteenth century, the age of reason 
confined. It confined the debauched, spendthrift fathers, 
prodigal sons, blasphemers, men who “seek to undo themselves,” 
libertines. And through these parallels, these strange 
complicities, the age sketched the profile of its own experience of 
unreason. 

But in each of these cities, we find an entire population of 
madness as well. One-tenth of all the arrests made in Paris for 
the Hopital General concern “the insane,” “demented” men, 
individuals of “wandering mind,” and “persons who have become 
completely mad.” Between these and the others, no sign of a 
differentiation. Judging from the registries, the same sensibility 
appears to collect them, the same gestures to set them apart. We 
leave it to medical archaeology to determine whether or not a 
man was sick, criminal, or insane who was admitted to the 
hospital for “derangement of morals,” or because he had 
“mistreated his wife” and tried several times to kill himself. 

Yet it must not be forgotten that the “insane” had as such a 
particular place in the world of confinement. Their status was 
not merely that of prisoners. In the general sensibility to 
unreason, there appeared to be a special modulation which 
concerned madness proper, and was addressed to those called, 
without exact semantic distinction, insane, alienated, deranged, 
demented, extravagant. 

This particular form of sensibility traces the features proper to 
madness in the world of unreason. It is primarily concerned with 
scandal. In its most general form, confinement is explained, or at 
least justified, by the desire to avoid scandal. It even signifies 


77 



thereby an important change in the consciousness of evil. The 
Renaissance had freely allowed the forms of unreason to come 
out into the light of day; public outrage gave evil the powers of 
example and redemption. Gilles de Rais, accused, in the fifteenth 
century, of having been and of being “a heretic, an apostate, a 
sorcerer, a sodomite, an invoker of evil spirits, a soothsayer, a 
slayer of innocents, an idolater, working evil by deviation from 
the faith,” ended by himself admitting to crimes “sufficient to 
cause the deaths of ten thousand persons” in extrajudiciary 
confession; he repeated his avowal in Latin before the tribunal; 
then he asked, of his own accord, that “the said confession 
should be published in the vulgar tongue and exhibited to each 
and every one of those present, the majority of whom knew no 
Latin, the publication and confession to his shame of the said 
offenses by him committed, in order the more easily to obtain 
the remission of sins, and the mercy of God for the pardon of 
the sins by him committed.” At the trial, the same confession 
was required before those assembled: he “was told by the 
Presiding Judge that he should state his case fully, and the shame 
that he would gain thereby would serve to lessen the punishment 
he would suffer hereafter.” Until the seventeenth century, evil in 
all its most violent and most inhuman forms could not be dealt 
with and punished unless it was brought into the open. The light 
in which confession was made and punishment executed could 
alone balance the darkness from which evil issued. In order to 
pass through all the stages of its fulfillment, evil must necessarily 
incur public avowal and manifestation before reaching the 
conclusion which suppresses it. 

Confinement, on the contrary, betrays a form of conscience to 
which the inhuman can suggest only shame. There are aspects of 
evil that have such a power of contagion, such a force of scandal 
that any publicity multiplies them infinitely. Only oblivion can 
suppress them. In a case of poisoning, Pontchartrain orders not a 
public trial but the secrecy of an asylum: “As the facts of the case 


78 



concerned a good part of Paris, the King did not believe that so 
many people should be brought to trial, many of whom had 
committed crimes unawares, and others only by the ease of doing 
so; His Majesty so determined the more readily insofar as he is 
persuaded that there are certain crimes which must absolutely be 
thrust into oblivion.”! Beyond the dangers of example, the honor 
of families and that of religion sufficed to recommend a subject 
for a house of confinement. Apropos of a priest who was to be 
sent to Saint-Lazare: “Hence a priest such as this cannot be 
hidden away with too much care for the honor of religion and 
that of the priesthood. ”3 Even late in the eighteenth century, 
Malesherbes would defend confinement as a right of families 
seeking to escape dishonor. “That which is called a base action is 
placed in the rank of those which public order does not permit us 
to tolerate.... It seems that the honor of a family requires the 
disappearance from society of the individual who by vile and 
abject habits shames his relatives.” Inversely, liberation is in order 
when the danger of scandal is past and the honor of families or 
of the Church can no longer be sullied. The Abbe Bargede had 
been confined for a long time; never, despite his requests, had his 
release been authorized; but now old age and infirmity had made 
scandal impossible. “And besides, his paralysis persists,” writes 
d’Argenson; “he can neither write nor sign his name; I think that 
there would be justice and charity in setting him free.” All those 
forms of evil that border on unreason must be thrust into secrecy. 
Classicism felt a shame in the presence of the inhuman that the 
Renaissance had never experienced. 

Yet there is one exception in this consignment to secrecy: that 
which is made for madmen.3 It was doubtless a very old custom 
of the Middle Ages to display the insane. In certain of the 
Narrturmer in Germany, barred windows had been installed 
which permitted those outside to observe the madmen chained 
within. They thus constituted a spectacle at the city gates. The 


79 


strange fact is that this custom did not disappear once the doors 
of the asylums closed, but that on the contrary it then developed, 
assuming in Paris and London almost an institutional character. 
As late as 1815, if a report presented in the House of Commons 
is to be believed, the hospital of Bethlehem exhibited lunatics for 
a penny, every Sunday. Now the annual revenue from these 
exhibitions amounted to almost four hundred pounds; which 
suggests the astonishingly high number of 96,000 visits a year.4 
In France, the excursion to Bicetre and the display of the insane 
remained until the Revolution one of the Sunday distractions for 
the Left Bank bourgeoisie. Mirabeau reports in his Observations 
dun voyageur anglais that the madmen at Bicetre were shown 
“like curious animals, to the first simpleton willing to pay a coin.” 
One went to see the keeper display the madmen the way the 
trainer at the Fair of Saint-Germain put the monkeys through 
their tricks.5 Certain attendants were well known for their ability 
to make the mad perform dances and acrobatics, with a few flicks 
of the whip. The only extenuation to be found at the end of the 
eighteenth century was that the mad were allowed to exhibit the 
mad, as if it were the responsibility of madness to testify to its 
own nature. “Let us not slander human nature. The English 
traveler is right to regard the office of exhibiting madmen as 
beyond the most hardened humanity. We have already said so. 
But all dilemmas afford a remedy. It is the madmen themselves 
who are entrusted in their lucid intervals with displaying their 
companions, who, in their turn, return the favor. Thus the 
keepers of these unfortunate creatures enjoy the profits that the 
spectacle affords, without indulging in a heartlessness to which, 

no doubt, they could never descend.’’^ Here is madness elevated 
to spectacle above the silence of the asylums, and becoming a 
public scandal for the general delight. Unreason was hidden in 
the silence of the houses of confinement, but madness continued 
to be present on the stage of the world—with more commotion 


80 


than ever. It would soon reach, under the Empire, a point that 
had never been attained in the Middle Ages and the 
Renaissance; the strange Brotherhood of the Blue Ship had once 
given performances in which madness was mimed; now it was 
madness itself, madness in flesh and blood, which put on the 
show. Early in the nineteenth century, Coulmier, the director of 
Charenton, had organized those famous performances in which 
madmen sometimes played the roles of actors, sometimes those 
of watched spectators. “The insane who attended these 
theatricals were the object of the attention and curiosity of a 
frivolous, irresponsible, and often vicious public. The bizarre 
attitudes of these unfortunates and their condition provoked the 
mocking laughter and the insulting pity of the spectators.”7 
Madness became pure spectacle, in a world over which Sade 
extended his sovereignty and which was offered as a diversion to 
the good conscience of a reason sure of itself. Until the 
beginning of the nineteenth century, and to the indignation of 
Royer-Collard, madmen remained monsters—that is, 
etymologically, beings or things to be shown. 

Confinement hid away unreason, and betrayed the shame it 
aroused; but it explicitly drew attention to madness, pointed to 
it. If, in the case of unreason, the chief intention was to avoid 
scandal, in the case of madness that intention was to organize it. 
A strange contradiction: the classical age enveloped madness in a 
total experience of unreason; it reabsorbed its particular forms, 
which the Middle Ages and the Renaissance had clearly 
individualized into a general apprehension in which madness 
consorted indiscriminately with all the forms of unreason. But at 
the same time it assigned to this same madness a special sign: not 
that of sickness, but that of glorified scandal. Yet there is 
nothing in common between this organized exhibition of 
madness in the eighteenth century and the freedom with which 
it came to light during the Renaissance. In the Renaissance, 


81 


madness was present everywhere and mingled with every 
experience by its images or its dangers. During the classical 
period, madness was shown, but on the other side of bars; if 
present, it was at a distance, under the eyes of a reason that no 
longer felt any relation to it and that would not compromise 
itself by too close a resemblance. Madness had become a thing to 
look at: no longer a monster inside oneself, but an animal with 
strange mechanisms, a bestiality from which man had long since 
been suppressed. “I can easily conceive of a man without hands, 
feet, head (for it is only experience which teaches us that the 
head is more necessary than the feet). But I cannot conceive of 
man without thought; that would be a stone or a brute.”8 

In his Report on the Care of the Insane Desportes describes the 
cells of Bicetre as they were at the end of the eighteenth century: 
“The unfortunate whose entire furniture consisted of this straw 
pallet, lying with his head, feet, and body pressed against the 
wall, could not enjoy sleep without being soaked by the water 
that trickled from that mass of stone.” As for the cells of La 
Salpetriere, what made “the place more miserable and often more 
fatal, was that in winter, when the waters of the Seine rose, those 
cells situated at the level of the sewers became not only more 
unhealthy, but worse still, a refuge for a swarm of huge rats, 
which during the night attacked the unfortunates confined there 
and bit them wherever they could reach them; madwomen have 
been found with feet, hands, and faces torn by bites which are 
often dangerous and from which several have died.” But these 
were the dungeons and cells long reserved for the most 
dangerous and most violent of the insane. If they were calmer, 
and if no one had anything to fear from them, they were 
crammed into wards of varying size. One of Samuel Tuke’s most 
active disciples, Godfrey Higgins, had obtained the right, which 
cost him twenty pounds, to visit the asylum of York as a 
volunteer inspector. In the course of a visit, he discovered a door 


82 


that had been carefully concealed and found behind it a room, 
not eight feet on a side, which thirteen women occupied during 
the night; by day, they lived in a room scarcely larger. 

On the other hand, when the insane were particularly 
dangerous, they were constrained by a system which was 
doubtless not of a punitive nature, but simply intended to fix 
within narrow limits the physical locus of a raging frenzy. 
Sufferers were generally chained to the walls and to the beds. At 
Bethlehem, violent madwomen were chained by the ankles to the 
wall of a long gallery; their only garment was a homespun dress. 
At another hospital, in Bethnal Green, a woman subject to 
violent seizures was placed in a pigsty, feet and fists bound; when 
the crisis had passed she was tied to her bed, covered only by a 
blanket; when she was allowed to take a few steps, an iron bar 
was placed between her legs, attached by rings to her ankles and 
by a short chain to handcuffs. Samuel Tuke, in his Report on the 
Condition of the Indigent Insane , gives the details of a complicated 
system devised at Bethlehem to control a reputedly dangerous 
madman: he was attached by a long chain that ran over the wall 
and thus permitted the attendant to lead him about, to keep him 
on a leash, so to speak, from outside; around his neck had been 
placed an iron ring, which was attached by a short chain to 
another ring; this latter slid the length of a vertical iron bar 
fastened to the floor and ceiling of the cell. When reforms began 
to be instituted at Bethlehem, a man was found who had lived in 
this cell, attached in this fashion, for twelve years. 

When practices reach this degree of violent intensity, it 
becomes clear that they are no longer inspired by the desire to 
punish nor by the duty to correct. The notion of a “resipiscence” 
is entirely foreign to this regime. But there was a certain image 
of animality that haunted the hospitals of the period. Madness 
borrowed its face from the mask of the beast. Those chained to 
the cell walls were no longer men whose minds had wandered, 
but beasts preyed upon by a natural frenzy: as if madness, at its 


83 



extreme point, freed from that moral unreason in which its most 
attenuated forms are enclosed, managed to rejoin, by a paroxysm 
of strength, the immediate violence of animality. This model of 
animality prevailed in the asylums and gave them their cagelike 
aspect, their look of the menagerie. Coguel describes La 
Salpetriere at the end of the eighteenth century: “Madwomen 
seized with fits of violence are chained like dogs at their cell 
doors, and separated from keepers and visitors alike by a long 
corridor protected by an iron grille; through this grille is passed 
their food and the straw on which they sleep; by means of rakes, 
part of the filth that surrounds them is cleaned out.” At the 
hospital of Nantes, the menagerie appears to consist of individual 
cages for wild beasts. Never had Esquirol seen “such an 
extravagance of locks, of bolts, of iron bars to shut the doors of 
the cells.... Tiny openings pierced next to the doors were fitted 
with iron bars and shutters. Quite close to this opening hung a 
chain fastened to the wall and bearing at its end a cast-iron 
receptacle, somewhat resembling a wooden shoe, in which food 
was placed and passed through the bars of these openings.” 
When Fran^ois-Emmanuel Fodere arrived at the hospital of 
Strasbourg in 1814, he found a kind of human stable, 
constructed with great care and skill: “for troublesome madmen 
and those who dirtied themselves, a kind of cage, or wooden 
closet, which could at the most contain one man of middle 
height, had been devised at the ends of the great wards.” These 
cages had gratings for floors, and did not rest on the ground but 
were raised about fifteen centimeters. Over these gratings was 
thrown a little straw “upon which the madman lay, naked or 
nearly so, took his meals, and deposited his excrement.” 

This, to be sure, is a whole security system against the violence 
of the insane and the explosion of their fury. Such outbursts are 
regarded chiefly as a social danger. But what is most important is 
that it is conceived in terms of an animal freedom. The negative 
fact that “the madman is not treated like a human being” has a 


84 



very positive content: this inhuman indifference actually has an 
obsessional value: it is rooted in the old fears which since 
antiquity, and especially since the Middle Ages, have given the 
animal world its familiar strangeness, its menacing marvels, its 
entire weight of dumb anxiety. Yet this animal fear which 
accompanies, with all its imaginary landscape, the perception of 
madness, no longer has the same meaning it had two or three 
centuries earlier: animal metamorphosis is no longer the visible 
sign of infernal powers, nor the result of a diabolic alchemy of 
unreason. The animal in man no longer has any value as the sign 
of a Beyond; it has become his madness, without relation to 
anything but itself: his madness in the state of nature. The 
animality that rages in madness dispossesses man of what is 
specifically human in him; not in order to deliver him over to 
other powers, but simply to establish him at the zero degree of 
his own nature. For classicism, madness in its ultimate form is 
man in immediate relation to his animality, without other 
reference, without any recourse. 

The day would come when from an evolutionary perspective 
this presence of animality in madness would be considered as the 
sign—indeed, as the very essence—of disease. In the classical 
period, on the contrary, it manifested the very fact that the 
madman was not a sick man. Animality, in fact, protected the 
lunatic from whatever might be fragile, precarious, or sickly in 
man. The animal solidity of madness, and that density it borrows 
from the blind world of beasts, inured the madman to hunger, 
heat, cold, pain. It was common knowledge until the end of the 
eighteenth century that the insane could support the miseries of 
existence indefinitely. There was no need to protect them; they 
had no need to be covered or warmed. When, in 1811, Samuel 
Tuke visited a workhouse in the Southern Counties, he saw cells 
where the daylight passed through little barred windows that had 
been cut in the doors. All the women were entirely naked. Now 
“the temperature was extremely rigorous, and the evening of the 


85 



day before, the thermometer had indicated a cold of 18 degrees. 
One of these unfortunate women was lying on a little straw, 
without covering.” This ability of the insane to endure, like 
animals, the worst inclemencies was still a medical dogma for 
Pinel; he would always admire “the constancy and the ease with 
which certain of the insane of both sexes bear the most rigorous 
and prolonged cold. In the month of Nivose of the Year III, on 
certain days when the thermometer indicated 10, 11, and as 
many as 16 degrees below freezing, a madman in the hospital of 
Bicetre could not endure his wool blanket, and remained sitting 
on the icy floor of his cell. In the morning, one no sooner opened 
his door than he ran in his shirt into the inner court, taking ice 
and snow by the fistful, applying it to his breast and letting it 
melt with a sort of delectation.” Madness, insofar as it partook of 
animal ferocity, preserved man from the dangers of disease; it 
afforded him an invulnerability, similar to that which nature, in 
its foresight, had provided for animals. Curiously, the 
disturbance of his reason restored the madman to the immediate 
kindness of nature by a return to animality. 

This is why, at this extreme point, madness was less than ever 
linked to medicine; nor could it be linked to the domain of 
correction. Unchained animality could be mastered only by 
discipline and brutalizing. The theme of the animal-madman was 
effectively realized in the eighteenth century, in occasional 
attempts to impose a certain pedagogy on the insane. Pinel cites 
the case of a “very famous monastic establishment, in one of the 
southern regions of France,” where a violent madman would be 
given “a precise order to change”; if he refused to go to bed or to 
eat, he “was warned that obstinacy in his deviations would be 
punished on the next day with ten strokes of the bullwhip.” If, 
on the contrary, he was submissive and docile, he was allowed “to 
take his meals in the refectory, next to the disciplinarian,” but at 
the least transgression, he was instantly admonished by a “heavy 
blow of a rod across his fingers.” Thus, by the use of a curious 


86 



dialectic whose movement explains all these “inhuman” practices 
of confinement, the free animality of madness was tamed only by 
such discipline whose meaning was not to raise the bestial to the 
human, but to restore man to what was purely animal within 
him. Madness discloses a secret of animality which is its own 
truth, and in which, in some way, it is reabsorbed. Toward the 
middle of the eighteenth century, a farmer in the north of 
Scotland had his hour of fame. He was said to possess the art of 
curing insanity. Pinel notes in passing that this Gregory had the 
physique of a Hercules: “His method consisted in forcing the 
insane to perform the most difficult tasks of farming, in using 
them as beasts of burden, as servants, in reducing them to an 
ultimate obedience with a barrage of blows at the least act of 
revolt.” In the reduction to animality, madness finds both its 
truth and its cure; when the madman has become a beast, this 
presence of the animal in man, a presence which constituted the 
scandal of madness, is eliminated: not that the animal is silenced, 
but man himself is abolished. In the human being who has 
become a beast of burden, the absence of reason follows wisdom 
and its order: madness is then cured, since it is alienated in 
something which is no less than its truth. 

A moment would come when, from this animality of madness, 
would be deduced the idea of a mechanistic psychology, and the 
notion that the forms of madness can be referred to the great 
structures of animal life. But in the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries, the animality that lends its face to madness in no way 
stipulates a determinist nature for its phenomena. On the 
contrary, it locates madness in an area of unforeseeable freedom 
where frenzy is unchained; if determinism can have any effect on 
it, it is in the form of constraint, punishment, or discipline. 
Through animality, madness does not join the great laws of 
nature and of life, but rather the thousand forms of a bestiary. 
But unlike the one popular in the Middle Ages, which 
illustrated, in so many symbolic visages, the metamorphoses of 


87 



evil, this was an abstract bestiary; here evil no longer assumed its 
fantastic body; here we apprehend only its most extreme form, 
the truth of the beast which is a truth without content. Evil is 
freed from all that its wealth of iconographic fauna could do, to 
preserve only a general power of intimidation: the secret danger 
of an animality that lies in wait and, all at once, undoes reason in 
violence and truth in the madmans frenzy. Despite the 
contemporary effort to constitute a positivist zoology, this 
obsession with an animality perceived as the natural locus of 
madness continued to people the hell of the classical age. It was 
this obsession that created the imagery responsible for all the 
practices of confinement and the strangest aspects of its savagery. 

It has doubtless been essential to Western culture to link, as it 
has done, its perception of madness to the iconographic forms of 
the relation of man to beast. From the start, Western culture has 
not considered it evident that animals participate in the 
plenitude of nature, in its wisdom and its order: this idea was a 
late one and long remained on the surface of culture; perhaps it 
has not yet penetrated very deeply into the subterranean regions 
of the imagination. In fact, on close examination, it becomes 
evident that the animal belongs rather to an anti-nature, to a 
negativity that threatens order and by its frenzy endangers the 
positive wisdom of nature. The work of Lautreamont bears 
witness to this. Why should the fact that Western man has lived 
for two thousand years on his definition as a rational animal 
necessarily mean that he has recognized the possibility of an 
order common to reason and to animality? Why should he have 
necessarily designated, by this definition, the way in which he 
inserts himself in natural positivity? Independently of what 
Aristotle really meant, may we not assume that for the West this 
“rational animal” has long been the measure of the way in which 
reason s freedom functioned in the locus of unreason, diverging 
from it until it constituted its opposite term? From the moment 
philosophy became anthropology, and man sought to recognize 


88 



himself in a natural plenitude, the animal lost its power of 
negativity, in order to become, between the determinism of 
nature and the reason of man, the positive form of an evolution. 
The formula of the “rational animal” has utterly changed its 
meaning: the unreason it suggested as the origin of all possible 
reason has entirely disappeared. Henceforth madness must obey 
the determinism of man perceived as a natural being in his very 
animality. In the classical age, if it is true that the scientific and 
medical analysis of madness, as we shall see below, sought to 
establish it within this natural mechanism, the real practices that 
concern the insane bear sufficient witness to the fact that 
madness was still contained in the anti-natural violence of 
animality. 

In any case, it was this animality of madness which 
confinement glorified, at the same time that it sought to avoid 
the scandal inherent in the immorality of the unreasonable. Which 
reveals the distance established in the classical age between 
madness and the other forms of unreason, even if it is true that 
from a certain point of view they had been identified or 
assimilated. If a whole range of unreason was reduced to silence, 
but madness left free to speak the language of its scandal, what 
lesson could it teach which unreason as a whole was not capable 
of transmitting? What meaning had the frenzies and all the fury 
of the insane, which could not be found in the—probably more 
sensible—remarks of the other internees? In what respect then 
was madness more particularly significant? 

Beginning with the seventeenth century, unreason in the most 
general sense no longer had much instructive value. That 
perilous reversibility of reason which was still so close for the 
Renaissance was to be forgotten, and its scandals were to 
disappear. The great theme of the madness of the Cross, which 
belonged so intimately to the Christian experience of the 
Renaissance, began to disappear in the seventeenth century, 


89 



despite Jansenism and Pascal. Or rather, it subsisted, but 
changed and somehow inverted its meaning. It was no longer a 
matter of requiring human reason to abandon its pride and its 
certainties in order to lose itself in the great unreason of sacrifice. 
When classical Christianity speaks of the madness of the Cross, 
it is merely to humiliate false reason and add luster to the eternal 
light of truth; the madness of God-in-man’s-image is simply a 
wisdom not recognized by the men of unreason who live in this 
world: “Jesus crucified ... was the scandal of the world and 
appeared as nothing but ignorance and madness to the eyes of 
his time.” But the fact that the world has become Christian, and 
that the order of God is revealed through the meanderings of 
history and the madness of men, now suffices to show that 
“Christ has become the highest point of our wisdom.”9 The 
scandal of Christian faith and Christian abasement, whose 
strength and value as revelation Pascal still preserved, would soon 
have no more meaning for Christian thought except perhaps to 
reveal in these scandalized consciences so many blind souls: “Do 
not permit your Cross, which has subdued the universe for you, 
to be still the madness and scandal of proud minds.” Christian 
unreason was relegated by Christians themselves into the 
margins of a reason that had become identical with the wisdom 
of God incarnate. After Port-Royal, men would have to wait two 
centuries—until Dostoievsky and Nietzsche—for Christ to 
regain the glory of his madness, for scandal to recover its power 
as revelation, for unreason to cease being merely the public 
shame of reason. 

But at the very moment Christian reason rid itself of the 
madness that had so long been a part of itself, the madman, in 
his abolished reason, in the fury of his animality, received a 
singular power as a demonstration: it was as if scandal, driven out 
of that superhuman region where it related to God and where 
the Incarnation was manifested, reappeared, in the plenitude of 


90 


its force and pregnant with a new lesson, in that region where 
man has a relation to nature and to his animality. The lesson’s 
point of application has shifted to the lower regions of madness. 
The Cross is no longer to be considered in its scandal; but it 
must not be forgotten that throughout his human life Christ 
honored madness, sanctified it as he sanctified infirmity cured, 
sin forgiven, poverty assured of eternal riches. Saint Vincent de 
Paul reminds those assigned to tend the mad within the houses 
of confinement that their “rule in this is Our Lord who chose to 
be surrounded by lunatics, demoniacs, madmen, the tempted and 
the possessed.” These men ruled by the powers of the inhuman 
constitute, around those who represent eternal Wisdom, around 
the Man who incarnates it, a perpetual occasion for glorification: 
because they glorify, by surrounding it, the wisdom that has been 
denied them, and at the same time give it a pretext to humiliate 
itself, to acknowledge that it is granted only by grace. Further: 
Christ did not merely choose to be surrounded by lunatics; he 
himself chose to pass in their eyes for a madman, thus 
experiencing, in his incarnation, all the sufferings of human 
misfortune. Madness thus became the ultimate form, the final 
degree of God in man’s image, before the fulfillment and 
deliverance of the Cross: “O my Savior, you were pleased to be a 
scandal to the Jews, and a madness to the Gentiles; you were 
pleased to seem out of your senses, as it is reported in the Holy 
Gospel that it was thought of Our Lord that he had gone mad. 
Dicebant quoniam in furorem versus est. His Apostles sometimes 
looked upon him as a man in anger, and he seemed such to 
them, so that they should bear witness that he had borne with all 
our infirmities and all our states of affliction, and to teach them 
and us as well to have compassion upon those who fall into these 
infirmities.” 10 Coming into this world, Christ agreed to take 
upon himself all the signs of the human condition and the very 
stigmata of fallen nature; from poverty to death, he followed the 


91 


long road of the Passion, which was also the road of the passions, 
of wisdom forgotten, and of madness. And because it was one of 
the forms of the Passion—the ultimate form, in a sense, before 
death—madness would now become, for those who suffered it, 
an object of respect and compassion. 

To respect madness is not to interpret it as the involuntary and 
inevitable accident of disease, but to recognize this lower limit of 
human truth, a limit not accidental but essential. As death is the 
limit of human life in the realm of time, madness is its limit in 
the realm of animality, and just as death had been sanctified by 
the death of Christ, madness, in its most bestial nature, had also 
been sanctified. On March 29, 1654, Saint Vincent de Paul 
announced to Jean Barreau, himself a congreganist, that his 
brother had just been confined at Saint-Lazare as a lunatic: “We 
must honor Our Lord in the state wherein He was when they 
sought to bind Him, saying quoniam in frenesim versus est , in 
order to sanctify that state in those whom His Divine Providence 
has placed there.”! 1 Madness is the lowest point of humanity to 
which God submitted in His incarnation, thereby showing that 
there was nothing inhuman in man that could not be redeemed 
and saved; the ultimate point of the Fall was glorified by the 
divine presence: and it is this lesson which, for the seventeenth 
century, all madness still taught. 

We see why the scandal of madness could be exalted, while 
that of the other forms of unreason was concealed with so much 
care. The scandal of unreason produced only the contagious 
example of transgression and immorality; the scandal of madness 
showed men how close to animality their Fall could bring them; 
and at the same time how far divine mercy could extend when it 
consented to save man. For Renaissance Christianity, the entire 
instructive value of unreason and of its scandals lay in the 
madness of the Incarnation of God in man. For classicism, the 
Incarnation is no longer madness; but what is madness is this 


92 


incarnation of man in the beast, which is, as the ultimate point of 
his Fall, the most manifest sign of his guilt; and, as the ultimate 
object of divine mercy, the symbol of universal forgiveness and 
innocence regained. Henceforth, all the lessons of madness and 
the power of its instruction must be sought in this obscure 
region, at the lower confines of humanity, where man is hinged 
to nature, where he is both ultimate downfall and absolute 
innocence. Does not the Church’s solicitude for the insane 
during the classical period, as it is symbolized in Saint Vincent 
de Paul and his Congregation, or in the Brothers of Charity, all 
those religious orders hovering over madness and showing it to 
the world—does this not indicate that the Church found in 
madness a difficult but an essential lesson: the guilty innocence 
of the animal in man? This is the lesson to be read and 
understood in its spectacles, in which it exalted in the madman 
the fury of the human beast. Paradoxically, this Christian 
consciousness of animality prepared the moment when madness 
would be treated as a fact of nature; it would then be quickly 
forgotten what this “nature” meant for classical thought: not the 
always accessible domain of an objective analysis, but that region 
in which there appears, for man, the always possible scandal of a 
madness that is both his ultimate truth and the form of his 
abolition. 

All these phenomena, these strange practices woven around 
madness, these usages which glorify and at the same time 
discipline it, reduce it to animality while making it teach the 
lesson of the Redemption, put madness in a strange position 
with regard to unreason as a whole. In the houses of 
confinement, madness cohabits with all the forms of unreason 
which envelop it and define its most general truth; and yet 
madness is isolated, treated in a special manner, manifested in its 
singularity as if, though belonging to unreason, it nonetheless 
traversed that domain by a movement peculiar to itself, 


93 



ceaselessly referring from itself to its most paradoxical extreme. 

We have now got in the habit of perceiving in madness a fall 
into a determinism where all forms of liberty are gradually 
suppressed; madness shows us nothing more than the natural 
constants of a determinism, with the sequences of its causes, and 
the discursive movement of its forms; for madness threatens 
modern man only with that return to the bleak world of beasts 
and things, to their fettered freedom. It is not on this horizon of 
nature that the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries recognized 
madness, but against a background of Unreason', madness did not 
disclose a mechanism, but revealed a liberty raging in the 
monstrous forms of animality. We no longer understand 
unreason today, except in its epithetic form: the Unreasonable , a 
sign attached to conduct or speech, and betraying to the layman’s 
eyes the presence of madness and all its pathological train; for us 
the unreasonable is only one of madness’s modes of appearance. 
On the contrary, unreason, for classicism, had a nominal value; it 
constituted a kind of substantial function. It was in relation to 
unreason and to it alone that madness could be understood. 
Unreason was its support; or let us say that unreason defined the 
locus of madness’s possibility. For classical man, madness was 
not the natural condition, the human and psychological root of 
unreason; it was only unreason’s empirical form; and the 
madman, tracing the course of human degradation to the 
frenzied nadir of animality, disclosed that underlying realm of 
unreason which threatens man and envelops—at a tremendous 
distance—all the forms of his natural existence. It was not a 
question of tending toward a determinism, but of being 
swallowed up by a darkness. More effectively than any other kind 
of rationalism, better in any case than our positivism, classical 
rationalism could watch out for and guard against the 
subterranean danger of unreason, that threatening space of an 
absolute freedom. 


94 



IV 



95 


PASSIONAND 

DELIRIUM 


THE savage danger of madness is related to the danger of the 
passions and to their fatal concatenation. 

Sauvages had sketched the fundamental role of passion, citing 
it as a more constant, more persistent, and somehow more 
deserved cause of madness: “The distraction of our mind is the 
result of our blind surrender to our desires, our incapacity to 
control or to moderate our passions. Whence these amorous 
frenzies, these antipathies, these depraved tastes, this melancholy 
which is caused by grief, these transports wrought in us by 
denial, these excesses in eating, in drinking, these indispositions, 
these corporeal vices which cause madness, the worst of all 
maladies.”! But as yet, what was involved was only passion’s 
moral precedence, its responsibility, in a vague way; the real 
target of this denunciation was the radical relation of the 
phenomena of madness to the very possibility of passion. 

Before Descartes, and long after his influence as philosopher 
and physiologist had diminished, passion continued to be the 
meeting ground of body and soul; the point where the latter’s 
activity makes contact with the former’s passivity, each being a 
limit imposed upon the other and the locus of their 
communication. 

The medicine of humors sees this unity primarily as a 
reciprocal interaction: “The passions necessarily cause certain 
movements in the humors; anger agitates the bile, sadness excites 
melancholy (black bile), and the movements of the humors are 
on occasion so violent that they disrupt the entire economy of 
the body, even causing death; further, the passions augment the 
quantity of the humors; anger multiplies the bile as sadness 
increases melancholy. The humors which are customarily 


96 


agitated by certain passions dispose those in whom they abound 
to the same passions, and to thinking of the objects which 
ordinarily excite them; bile disposes to anger and to thinking of 
those we hate. Melancholy (black bile) disposes to sadness and to 
thinking of untoward things; well-tempered blood disposes to 
joy. 1 

The medicine of spirits substitutes for this vague idea of 
“disposition” the rigor of a physical, mechanical transmission of 
movements. If the passions are possible only in a being which 
has a body, and a body not entirely subject to the light of its 
mind and to the immediate transparence of its will, this is true 
insofar as, in ourselves and without ourselves, and generally in 
spite of ourselves, the mind’s movements obey a mechanical 
structure which is that of the movement of spirits. “Before the 
sight of the object of passion, the animal spirits were spread 
throughout the entire body in order to preserve all the parts in 
general; but at the presence of the new object, this entire 
economy is disrupted. The majority of spirits are impelled into 
the muscles of the arms, the legs, the face, and all the exterior 
parts of the body in order to afford it a disposition proper to the 
prevailing passion and to give it the countenance and movement 
necessary for the acquisition of the good or the escape from the 
evil which presents itself.”3 Passion thus disperses the spirits, 
which are disposed to passion: that is, under the effect of passion 
and in the presence of its object, the spirits circulate, disperse, 
and concentrate according to a spatial design which licenses the 
trace of the object in the brain and its image in the soul, thus 
forming in the body a kind of geometric figure of passion which 
is merely its expressive transposition; but which also constitutes 
passion’s essential causal basis, for when all the spirits are 
grouped around this object of passion, or at least around its 
image, the mind in its turn can tao longer ignore it and will 
consequently be subject to passion. 


97 


One more step, and the entire system becomes a unity in 
which body and soul communicate immediately in the symbolic 
values of common qualities. This is what happens in the 
medicine of solids and fluids, which dominates eighteenth- 
century practice. Tension and release, hardness and softness, 
rigidity and relaxation, congestion and dryness—these qualitative 
states characterize the soul as much as the body, and ultimately 
refer to a kind of indistinct and composite passional situation, 
one which imposes itself on the concatenation of ideas, on the 
course of feelings, on the state of fibers, on the circulation of 
fluids. The theme of causality here appears as too discursive, the 
elements it groups too disjunct for its schemas to be applicable. 
Are the “active passions, such as anger, joy, lust,” causes or 
consequences “of the excessive strength, the excessive tension, 
and the excessive elasticity of the nervous fibers, and of the 
excessive activity of the nervous fluid”? Conversely, cannot the 
“inert passions, such as fear, depression, ennui, lack of appetite, 
the coldness that accompanies homesickness, bizarre appetites, 
stupidity, lack of memory” be as readily followed as they are 
preceded by “weakness of the brain marrow and of the nervous 
fibers distributed in the organs, by impoverishment and inertia of 

the fluids”?^ Indeed, we must no longer try to situate passion in 
a causal succession, or halfway between the corporeal and the 
spiritual; passion indicates, at a new, deeper level, that the soul 
and the body are in a perpetual metaphorical relation in which 
qualities have no need to be communicated because they are 
already common to both; and in which phenomena of expression 
are not causes, quite simply because soul and body are always 
each other s immediate expression. Passion is no longer exactly at 
the geometrical center of the body-and-soul complex; it is, a 
little short of that, at the point where their opposition is not yet 
given, in that region where both their unity and their distinction 
are established. 


98 


But at this level, passion is no longer simply one of the causes 
—however powerful—of madness; rather it forms the basis for 
its very possibility. If it is true that there exists a realm, in the 
relations of soul and body, where cause and effect, determinism 
and expression still intersect in a web so dense that they actually 
form only one and the same movement which cannot be 
dissociated except after the fact; if it is true that prior to the 
violence of the body and the vivacity of the soul, prior to the 
softening of the fibers and the relaxation of the mind, there are 
qualitative, as yet unshared kinds of a priori which subsequently 
impose the same values on the organic and on the spiritual, then 
we see that there can be diseases such as madness which are from 
the start diseases of the body and of the soul, maladies in which 
the affection of the brain is of the same quality, of the same 
origin, of the same nature, finally, as the affection of the soul. 

The possibility of madness is therefore implicit in the very 
phenomenon of passion. 

It is true that long before the eighteenth century, and for a 
long series of centuries from which we have doubtless not 
emerged, passion and madness were kept in close relation to one 
another. But let us allow the classical period its originality. The 
moralists of the Greco-Latin tradition had found it just that 
madness be passion’s chastisement; and to be more certain that 
this was the case, they chose to define passion as a temporary and 
attenuated madness. But classical thought could define a relation 
between passion and madness which was not on the order of a 
pious hope, a pedagogic threat, or a moral synthesis; it even 
broke with the tradition by inverting the terms of the 
concatenation; it based the chimeras of madness on the nature of 
passion; it saw that the determinism of the passions was nothing 
but a chance for madness to penetrate the world of reason; and 
that if the unquestioned union of body and soul manifested 
man s finitude in passion, it laid this same man open, at the same 
time, to the infinite movement that destroyed him. 


99 



Madness, then, was not merely one of the possibilities 
afforded by the union of soul and body; it was not just one of the 
consequences of passion. Instituted by the unity of soul and 
body, madness turned against that unity and once again put it in 
question. Madness, made possible by passion, threatened by a 
movement proper to itself what had made passion itself possible. 
Madness was one of those unities in which laws were 
compromised, perverted, distorted—thereby manifesting such 
unity as evident and established, but also as fragile and already 
doomed to destruction. 

There comes a moment in the course of passion when laws are 
suspended as though of their own accord, when movement either 
abruptly stops, without collision or absorption of any kind of 
active force, or is propagated, the action ceasing only at the 
climax of the paroxysm. Whytt admits that an intense emotion 
can provoke madness exactly as impact can provoke movement, 
for the sole reason that emotion is both impact in the soul and 
agitation of the nervous fiber: “It is thus that sad narratives or 
those capable of moving the heart, a horrible and unexpected 
sight, great grief, rage, terror, and the other passions which make 
a great impression frequently occasion the most sudden and 
violent nervous symptoms.” But—it is here that madness, strictly 
speaking, begins—it happens that this movement immediately 
cancels itself out by its own excess and abruptly provokes an 
immobility which may reach the point of death itself. As if in the 
mechanics of madness, repose were not necessarily a quiescent 
thing but could also be a movement in violent opposition to 
itself, a movement which under the effect of its own violence 
abruptly achieves contradiction and the impossibility of 
continuance. “It is not unheard of that the passions, being very 
violent, generate a kind of tetanus or catalepsy such that the 
person then resembles a statue more than a living being. Further, 
fear, affliction, joy, and shame carried to their excess have more 


100 



than once been followed by sudden death. 

Conversely, it happens that movement, passing from soul to 
body and from body to soul, propagates itself indefinitely in a 
locus of anxiety certainly closer to that space where Malebranche 
placed souls than to that in which Descartes situated bodies. 
Imperceptible movements, often provoked by a slight external 
impact, accumulate, are amplified, and end by exploding in 
violent convulsions. Giovanni Maria Lancisi had already 
explained that the noble Romans were often subject to the vapors 
—hysterical attacks, hypochondriacal fits—because in their court 
life “their minds, continually agitated between fear and hope, 
never knew a moment’s repose.” According to many physicians, 
city life, the life of the court, of the salons, led to madness by this 
multiplicity of excitations constantly accumulated, prolonged, 
and echoed without ever being attenuated. But there is in this 
image, in its more intense forms, and in the events constituting 
its organic version, a certain force which, increasing, can lead to 
delirium, as if movement, instead of losing its strength in 
communicating itself, could involve other forces in its wake, and 
from them derive an additional vigor. This was how Sauvages 
explained the origin of madness: a certain impression of fear is 
linked to the congestion or the pressure of a certain medullary 
fiber; this fear is limited to an object, as this congestion is strictly 
localized. In proportion as this fear persists, the soul grants it 
more attention, increasingly isolating and detaching it from all 
else. But such isolation reinforces the fear, and the soul, having 
accorded it too special a condition, gradually tends to attach to it 
a whole series of more or less remote ideas: “It joins to this 
simple idea all those which are likely to nourish and augment it. 
For example, a man who supposes in his sleep that he is being 
accused of a crime, immediately associates this idea with that of 
its satellites—judges, executioners, the gibbet.” And from being 
thus burdened with all these new elements, involving them in its 


101 


course, the idea assumes a kind of additional power which 
ultimately renders it irresistible even to the most concerted 
efforts of the will. 

Madness, which finds its first possibility in the phenomenon 
of passion, and in the deployment of that double causality which, 
starting from passion itself, radiates both toward the body and 
toward the soul, is at the same time suspension of passion, 
breach of causality, dissolution of the elements of this unity. 
Madness participates both in the necessity of passion and in the 
anarchy of what, released by this very passion, transcends it and 
ultimately contests all it implies. Madness ends by being a 
movement of the nerves and muscles so violent that nothing in 
the course of images, ideas, or wills seems to correspond to it: 
this is the case of mania when it is suddenly intensified into 
convulsions, or when it degenerates into continuous frenzy. 
Conversely, madness can, in the body’s repose or inertia, 
generate and then maintain an agitation of the soul, without 
pause or pacification, as is the case in melancholia, where 
external objects do not produce the same impression on the 
sufferer s mind as on that of a healthy man; “his impressions are 
weak and he rarely pays attention to them; his mind is almost 
totally absorbed by the vivacity of certain ideas.”6 

Indeed this dissociation between the external movements of 
the body and the course of ideas does not mean that the unity of 
body and soul is necessarily dissolved, nor that each recovers its 
autonomy in madness. Doubtless the unity is compromised in its 
rigor and in its totality; but it is fissured, it turns out, along lines 
which do not abolish it, but divide it into arbitrary sectors. For 
when melancholia fixes upon an aberrant idea, it is not only the 
soul which is involved; it is the soul with the brain, the soul with 
the nerves, their origin and their fibers: a whole segment of the 
unity of soul and body is thus detached from the aggregate and 
especially from the organs by which reality is perceived. The 


102 


same thing occurs in convulsions and agitation: the soul is not 
excluded from the body, but is swept along so rapidly by it that it 
cannot retain all its conceptions; it is separated from its 
memories, its intentions, its firmest ideas, and thus isolated from 
itself and from all that remains stable in the body, it surrenders 
itself to the most mobile fibers; nothing in its behavior is 
henceforth adapted to reality, to truth, or to prudence; though 
the fibers in their vibration may imitate what is happening in the 
perceptions, the sufferer cannot tell the difference: “The rapid 
and chaotic pulsations of the arteries, or whatever other 
derangement occurs, imprints this same movement on the fibers 
(as in perception); they will represent as present objects which 
are not so, as true those which are chimerical.”? 

In madness, the totality of soul and body is parceled out: not 
according to the elements which constitute that totality 
metaphysically; but according to figures, images which envelop 
segments of the body and ideas of the soul in a kind of absurd 
unity. Fragments which isolate man from himself, but above all 
from reality; fragments which, by detaching themselves, have 
formed the unreal unity of a hallucination, and by very virtue of 
this autonomy impose it upon truth. “Madness is no more than 

the derangement of the imagination.”^ In other words, 
beginning with passion, madness is still only an intense 
movement in the rational unity of soul and body; this is the level 
of unreason ; but this intense movement quickly escapes the 
reason of the mechanism and becomes, in its violences, its 
stupors, its senseless propagations, an irrational movement; and 
it is then that, escaping truth and its constraints, the Unreal 
appears. 

And thereby we find the suggestion of the third cycle we must 
now trace: that of chimeras, of hallucinations, and of error—the 
cycle of non-being. 


103 


Let us listen to what is said in these fantastic fragments. 

Imagination is not madness. Even if in the arbitrariness of 
hallucination, alienation finds the first access to its vain liberty, 
madness begins only beyond this point, when the mind binds 
itself to this arbitrariness and becomes a prisoner of this apparent 
liberty. At the moment he wakes from a dream, a man can 
indeed observe: “I am imagining that I am dead”: he thereby 
denounces and measures the arbitrariness of the imagination—he 
is not mad. He is mad when he posits as an affirmation of his 
death—when he suggests as having some value as truth—the 
still-neutral content of the image “I am dead.” And just as the 
consciousness of truth is not carried away by the mere presence 
of the image, but in the act which limits, confronts, unifies, or 
dissociates the image, so madness will begin only in the act 
which gives the value of truth to the image. There is an original 
innocence of the imagination: “The imagination itself does not 
err, since it neither denies nor affirms but is fixed to so great a 
degree on the simple contemplation of an image”;9 and only the 
mind can turn what is given in the image into abusive truth, in 
other words, into error, or acknowledged error, that is, into 
truth: “A drunk man thinks he sees two candles where there is 
but one; a man who has a strabismus and whose mind is 
cultivated immediately acknowledges his error and accustoms 
himself to see but one.”10 Madness is thus beyond imagination, 
and yet it is profoundly rooted in it; for it consists merely in 
allowing the image a spontaneous value, total and absolute truth. 
The act of the reasonable man who, rightly or wrongly, judges an 
image to be true or false, is beyond this image, transcends and 
measures it by what is not itself; the act of the madman never 
oversteps the image presented, but surrenders to its immediacy, 
and affirms it only insofar is it is enveloped by it: “Many persons, 
not to say all, succumb to madness only from being too 
concerned about an object.” Inside the image, confiscated by 


104 


it, and incapable of escaping from it, madness is nonetheless 
more than imagination, forming an act of undetermined content. 

What is this act? An act of faith, an act of affirmation and of 
negation—a discourse which sustains and at the same time 
erodes the image, undermines it, distends it in the course of a 
reasoning, and organizes it around a segment of language. The 
man who imagines he is made of glass is not mad, for any sleeper 
can have this image in a dream; but he is mad if, believing he is 
made of glass, he thereby concludes that he is fragile, that he is 
in danger of breaking, that he must touch no object which might 
be too resistant, that he must in fact remain motionless, and so 
on. Such reasonings are those of a madman; but again we must 
note that in themselves they are neither absurd nor illogical. On 
the contrary, they apply correctly the most rigorous figures of 
logic. And Paul Zacchias has no difficulty finding them, in all 
their rigor, among the insane. Syllogism, in a man letting himself 
starve to death: “The dead do not eat; I am dead; hence I do not 
eat.” Induction extended to infinity, in a man suffering from 
persecution delusions: “A, B, and C are my enemies; all of them 
are men; therefore all men are my enemies.” Enthymeme, in 
another sufferer: “Most of those who have lived in this house are 
dead, hence I, who have lived in this house, am dead.” The 
marvelous logic of the mad which seems to mock that of the 
logicians because it resembles it so exactly, or rather because it is 
exactly the same, and because at the secret heart of madness, at 
the core of so many errors, so many absurdities, so many words 
and gestures without consequence, we discover, finally, the 
hidden perfection of a language. “From these things,” Zacchias 
concludes, “you truly see how best to discuss the intellect.” The 
ultimate language of madness is that of reason, but the language 
of reason enveloped in the prestige of the image, limited to the 
locus of appearance which the image defines. It forms, outside 
the totality of images and the universality of discourse, an 
abusive, singular organization whose insistent quality constitutes 


105 



madness. Madness, then, is not altogether in the image, which of 
itself is neither true nor false, neither reasonable nor mad; nor is 
it, further, in the reasoning which is mere form, revealing 
nothing but the indubitable figures of logic. And yet madness is 
in one and in the other: in a special version or figure of their 
relationship. 

Let us consider an example borrowed from Diemerbroek. A 
man was suffering from a profound melancholia. As with all 
melancholics, his mind was attached to a fixed idea, and this idea 
was for him the occasion of a constantly renewed sadness. He 
accused himself of having killed his son, and in the excess of his 
remorse, declared that God, for his punishment, had assigned a 
demon to tempt him, like the demon which had tempted the 
Lord. This demon he saw, spoke to, heard, and answered. He 
did not understand why those around him refused to 
acknowledge such a presence. Such then is madness: this 
remorse, this belief, this hallucination, these speeches; in short, 
this complex of convictions and images which constitutes a 
delirium. Now Diemerbroek tries to find out what are the 
“causes” of this madness, how it can have originated. And this is 
what he learns: this man had taken his son bathing and the boy 
had drowned. Hence the father considered himself responsible 
for his sons death. We can therefore reconstitute in the 
following manner the development of this madness: judging 
himself guilty, the man decides that homicide is execrable in the 
sight of God on High; whence it occurs to his imagination that 
he is eternally damned; and since he knows that the chief 
torment of damnation consists in being delivered into Satan’s 
hands, he tells himself “that a horrible demon is assigned to 
him.” This demon he does not as yet see, but since “he does not 
cease thinking of it,” and “regards this notion as necessarily true,” 
he imposes on his brain a certain image of this demon; this 
image is presented to his soul by the action of the brain and of 
the spirits with such insistence that he believes he continually 


106 



sees the demon itself.”12 

Hence madness, as analyzed by Diemerbroek, has two levels; 
one is manifest to all eyes: an unwarranted melancholia in a man 
who wrongly accuses himself of having killed his son; a depraved 
imagination which pictures demons; a dismantled reason which 
converses with a phantom. But at a deeper level, we find a 
rigorous organization dependent on the faultless armature of a 
discourse. This discourse, in its logic, commands the firmest 
belief in itself, it advances by judgments and reasonings which 
connect together; it is a kind of reason in action. In short, under 
the chaotic and manifest delirium reigns the order of a secret 
delirium. In this second delirium, which is, in a sense, pure 
reason, reason delivered of all the external tinsel of dementia, is 
located the paradoxical truth of madness. And this in a double 
sense, since we find here both what makes madness true 
(irrefutable logic, perfectly organized discourse, faultless 
connection in the transparency of a virtual language) and what 
makes it truly madness (its own nature, the special style of all its 
manifestations, and the internal structure of delirium). 

But still more profoundly, this delirious language is the 
ultimate truth of madness insofar as it is madness’s organizing 
form, the determining principle of all its manifestations, whether 
of the body or of the soul. For if Diemerbroek’s melancholic 
converses with his demon, it is because the demon’s image has 
been profoundly impressed by the movement of spirits on the 
still-ductile substance of the brain. But in its turn, this organic 
figure is merely the other side of a preoccupation which has 
obsessed the patient’s mind; it represents what might be called 
the sedimentation in the body of an infinitely repeated discourse 
apropos of the punishment God must reserve for sinners guilty of 
homicide. The body and the traces it conceals, the soul and the 
images it perceives, are here no more than stages in the syntax of 
delirious language. 


107 


And lest we be criticized for elaborating this entire analysis 
around a single observation from a single author (a privileged 
observation, since it concerns melancholic delirium), we shall 
also seek confirmation of the fundamental role of delirious 
discourse in the classical conception of madness in another 
author, of another period, and apropos of a very different disease. 
This is a case of “nymphomania” observed by Bienville. The 
imagination of a young girl, “Julie,” had been inflamed by 
precocious reading and aroused by the remarks of a servant girl 
“initiated into the secrets of Venus,... a virtuous handmaiden in 
the mother’s eyes” but “a dear and voluptuous stewardess of the 
daughter’s pleasures.” Yet Julie combats these—to her—new 
desires with all the impressions she has received in the course of 
her education; to the seductive language of novels, she opposes 
the lessons of religion and virtue; and despite the vivacity of her 
imagination, she does not succumb to disease so long as she 
possesses “the strength to reason thus with herself: it is neither 
lawful nor virtuous to obey so shameful a passion.’Td But the 
wicked remarks, the dangerous readings increase; at every 
moment, they render more intense the agitation of the 
weakening fibers; then the fundamental language by which she 
had hitherto resisted gradually gives way: “Nature alone had 
spoken hitherto; but soon illusion, chimera, and extravagance 
played their part; at length she acquired the unhappy strength to 
approve in herself this horrible maxim: nothing is so beautiful 
nor so sweet as to obey the desires of love.” This fundamental 
discourse opens the gates of madness: the imagination is freed, 
the appetites continually increase, the fibers reach the final 
degree of irritation. Delirium, in its lapidary form of a moral 
principle, leads straight to the convulsions which can endanger 
life itself. 

At the end of this last cycle which had begun with the liberty 
of the hallucination and which closes now with the rigor of 


108 


delirious language, we can conclude: 

1. In madness , for the classical age> there exist two forms oj 
delirium. A special, symptomatic form, proper to some of the 
diseases of the mind and especially to melancholia; in this sense 
we can say that there are diseases with or without delirium. In 
any case, such delirium is always manifest; it forms an integral 
part of the signs of madness; it is immanent to madness’s truth 
and constitutes only a sector of it. But there exists another 
delirium which is not always manifest, which is not formulated 
by the sufferer himself in the course of the disease, but which 
cannot fail to exist in the eyes of anyone who, seeking to trace 
the disease from its origins, attempts to formulate its riddle and 
its truth. 

2. This implicit delirium exists in all the alterations of the mind , 
even where we would expect it least. In cases of no more than 
silent gestures, wordless violence, oddities of conduct, classical 
thought has no doubt that madness is continually subjacent, 
relating each of these particular signs to the general essence of 
madness. James’s Dictionary expressly urges us to consider as 
delirious “the sufferers who sin by fault or excess in any of 
various voluntary actions, in a manner contrary to reason and to 
propriety; as when they use their hand, for example, to tear out 
tufts of wool or in an action similar to that which serves to catch 
flies; or when a patient acts against his custom and without 
cause, or when he speaks too much or too little against his 
normal habits; if he abounds in obscene remarks, being, when in 
health, of measured speech and decent in his discourse, and if he 
utters words that have no consequence, if he breathes more 
faintly than he must, or uncovers his private parts in the presence 
of those who are near him. We also regard as being in a state of 
delirium those whose minds are affected by some derangement 
in the organs of sense, or who use them in a fashion not 
customary to them, as when, for example, a sufferer is deprived 


109 



of some voluntary action or acts inhabitually.”14 

3. Thus understood , discourse covers the entire range of madness. 
Madness, in the classical sense, does not designate so much a 
specific change in the mind or in the body, as the existence, 
under the body’s alterations, under the oddity of conduct and 
conversation, of a delirious discourse. The simplest and most 
general definition we can give of classical madness is indeed 
delirium'. “This word is derived from lira, a furrow; so that deliro 
actually means to move out of the furrow, away from the proper 
path of reason.”! Hence it is not surprising to find the 
eighteenth-century nosographers often classifying vertigo as a 
madness, and more rarely hysterical convulsions; this is because it 
is often impossible to find in hysterical convulsions the unity of a 
language, while vertigo affords the delirious affirmation that the 
world is really “turning around.” Such delirium is a necessary and 
sufficient reason for a disease to be called madness. 

4. Language is the first and last structure of madness , its 
constituent form; on language are based all the cycles in which 
madness articulates its nature. That the essence of madness can 
be ultimately defined in the simple structure of a discourse does 
not reduce it to a purely psychological nature, but gives it a hold 
over the totality of soul and body; such discourse is both the 
silent language by which the mind speaks to itself in the truth 
proper to it, and the visible articulation in the movements of the 
body. Parallelisms, complements, all the forms of immediate 
communication which we have seen manifested, in madness are 
suspended between soul and body in this single language and in 
its powers. The movement of passion which persists until it 
breaks and turns against itself, the sudden appearance of the 
image, and the agitations of the body which were its visible 
concomitants—all this, even as we were trying to reconstruct it, 
was already secretly animated by this language. If the 
determinism of passion is transcended and released in the 


110 


hallucination of the image, if the image, in return, has swept 
away the whole world of beliefs and desires, it is because the 
delirious language was already present—a discourse which 
liberated passion from all its limits, and adhered with all the 
constraining weight of its affirmation to the image which was 
liberating itself 

It is in this delirium, which is of both body and soul, of both 
language and image, of both grammar and physiology, that all 
the cycles of madness conclude and begin. It is this delirium 
whose rigorous meaning organized them from the start. It is 
madness itself, and also, beyond each of its phenomena, its silent 
transcendence, which constitute the truth of madness. 

A last question remains: In the name of what can this 
fundamental language be regarded as a delirium? Granting that it 
is the truth of madness , what makes it true madness and the 
originating form of insanity? Why should it be in this discourse, 
whose forms we have seen to be so faithful to the rules of reason, 
that we find all those signs which will most manifestly declare 
the very absence of reason? 

A central question, but one to which the classical age has not 
formulated a direct answer. We must approach it obliquely, 
interrogating the experiences which are to be found in the 
immediate neighborhood of this essential language of madness: 
that is, the dream and the delusion. 

The quasi-oneiric character of madness is one of the constant 
themes in the classical period. A theme which doubtless derives 
from a very old tradition, to which Andre du Laurens, at the end 
of the sixteenth century, still testifies; for him melancholia and 
dreams have the same origin and bear, in relation to truth, the 
same value. There are “natural dreams” which represent what, 
during the preceding day, has passed through the senses or the 
understanding but happens to be modified by the specific 
temperament of the subject. In the same way, there is a 


111 



melancholia which has a merely physical origin in the disposition 
of the sufferer and alters, for his mind, the importance, the value, 
and so to speak the coloration of real events. But there is also a 
melancholia which permits the sufferer to predict the future, to 
speak in an unknown language, to see beings ordinarily invisible; 
this melancholia originates in a supernatural intervention, the 
same which brings to the sleepers mind those dreams which 
foresee the future, announce events to come, and cause him to 
see “strange things.” 

But in fact the seventeenth century preserves this tradition of 
the resemblance between madness and dreams only to break it all 
the more completely and to generate new, more essential 
relations. Relations in which madness and dreams are not only 
understood in their remote origin or in their imminent value as 
signs, but are confronted as phenomena, in their development, in 
their very nature. 

Dreams and madness then appeared to be of the same 
substance. Their mechanism was the same; thus Zacchias could 
identify in sleepwalking the movements which cause dreams, but 
which in a waking state can also provoke madness. 

In the first moments when one falls asleep, the vapors which 
rise in the body and ascend to the head are many, turbulent, and 
dense. They are so dark that they waken no image in the brain; 
they merely agitate, in their chaotic dance, the nerves and the 
muscles. The same is true in the frenzied, in maniacs: they suffer 
few hallucinations, no false beliefs, but an intense agitation 
which they cannot manage to control. Let us continue the 
evolution of sleep: after the first period of turbulence, the vapors 
which rise to the brain are clarified, their movement organized; 
this is the moment when fantastic dreams are born; one sees 
miracles, a thousand impossible things. To this stage corresponds 
that of dementia, in which one is convinced of many things 
“which are not in real life.” Then at last the agitation of the 
vapors is calmed altogether; the sleeper begins to see things still 


112 



more clearly; in the transparency of the henceforth limpid vapors, 
recollections of the day before reappear in accordance with 
reality; such images are at most transposed, on one point or 
another—as occurs in melancholics, who recognize all things as 
they are, “in particular those who are not merely distracted.” 
Between the gradual developments of sleep—with what they 
contribute at each stage to the quality of the imagination—and 
the forms of madness, the analogy is constant, because the 
mechanisms are the same: the same movement of vapors and 
spirits, the same liberation of images, the same correspondence 
between the physical qualities of phenomena and the 
psychological or moral values of sentiments. “To emerge from 
the insane no differently than from the sleeping.”!6 

The important thing, in Zacchias’s analysis, is that madness is 
not associated with dreams in their positive phenomena, but 
rather to the totality formed by sleep and dreams together: that 
is, to a complex which includes—besides the image— 
hallucination, memory, or prediction, the great void of sleep, the 
night of the senses, and all that negativity which wrests man 
from the waking state and its apparent truths. Whereas tradition 
compared the delirium of the madman to the vivacity of the 
dream images, the classical period identified delirium only with 
the complex of the image and the night of the mind, against 
which background it assumed its liberty. And this complex, 
transposed entire into the clarity of the waking state, constituted 
madness. This is how we must understand the definitions of 
madness which insistently recur throughout the classical period. 
The dream, as a complex figure of image and sleep, is almost 
always present in that definition. Either in a negative fashion— 
the notion of the waking state then being the only one that 
distinguishes madmen from sleepers; or in a positive fashion, 
delirium being defined as a modality of the dream, with the 
waking state as the specific difference: “Delirium is the dream of 


113 




waking persons.”!7 The ancients’ notion of the dream as a 
transitory form of madness is inverted; it is no longer the dream 
which borrows its disturbing powers from alienation—showing 
thereby how fragile or limited reason is; it is madness which 
takes its original nature from the dream and reveals in this 
kinship that it is a liberation of the image in the dark night of 
reality. 

The dream deceives; it leads to confusions; it is illusory. But it 
is not erroneous. And that is why madness is not exhausted in 
the waking modality of the dream, and why it overflows into 
error. It is true that in the dream, the imagination forges 
“impossible things and miracles,” or that it assembles lifelike 
figures “by an irrational method”; but, Zacchias remarks, “there 
is no error in these things, and consequently nothing insane.” 
Madness occurs when the images, which are so close to the 
dream, receive the affirmation or negation that constitutes error. 
It is in this sense that the Encyclopedic proposed its famous 
definition of madness: to depart from reason “with confidence 
and in the firm conviction that one is following it—that, it seems 
to me, is what is called being mad? Error is the other element 
always present with the dream, in the classical definition of 
insanity. The madman, in the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries, is not so much the victim of an illusion, of a 
hallucination of his senses, or of a movement of his mind. He is 
not abused ; he deceives himself. If it is true that on one hand the 
madman’s mind is led on by the oneiric arbitrariness of images, 
on the other, and at the same time, he imprisons himself in the 
circle of an erroneous consciousness: “We call madmen,” 
Sauvages was to say, “those who are actually deprived of reason 
or who persist in some notable error; it is this constant error of the 
soul manifest in its imagination, in its judgments, and in its 
desires, which constitutes the characteristic of this category.” 

Madness begins where the relation of man to truth is 


114 


disturbed and darkened. It is in this relation, at the same time as 
in the destruction of this relation, that madness assumes its 
general meaning and its particular forms. Dementia, Zacchias 
says, using the term here in the most general sense of madness, 
“lay in this, that the intellect did not distinguish true from false.” 
But this breakdown, if we can understand it only as negation, has 
positive structures which give it singular forms. According to the 
different forms of access to the truth, there will be different types 
of madness. It is in this sense that Chrichton, for example, 
distinguishes in the order of vesanias, first the class deliria , which 
alter that relation to the truth which takes shape in perception 
(“general delirium of the mental faculties, in which the diseased 
perceptions are taken for realities”); then the class hallucinations, 
which alter representation (“error of the mind in which imaginary 
objects are taken for realities, or else real objects are falsely 
represented”); and last, the class dementias , which without 
abolishing or altering the faculties that afford access to truth, 
weaken them and diminish their powers. 

But we can also analyze madness starting with truth itself and 
with the forms proper to it. It is in this manner that the 
Encyclopedie distinguishes “physical truth” from “moral truth.” 
“Physical truth consists in the accurate relation of our sensations 
with physical objects”; there will be a form of madness 
determined by the impossibility of acceding to this form of truth; 
a kind of madness of the physical world which includes illusions, 
hallucinations, all perceptual disturbances; “it is a madness to 
hear choirs of angels, as certain enthusiasts do.” “Moral truth,” 
on the other hand, “consists in the exactitude of the relations we 
discern either between moral objects, or between those objects 
and ourselves.” There will be a form of madness consisting of the 
loss of these relations; such is the madness of character, of 
conduct, and of the passions. “Veritable madnesses, then, are all 
the derangements of our mind, all the illusions of self-love, and 
all our passions when they are carried to the point of blindness; 


115 



for blindness is the distinctive characteristic of madness.”! 8 

Blindness : one of the words which comes closest to the essence 
of classical madness. It refers to that night of quasi-sleep which 
surrounds the images of madness, giving them, in their solitude, 
an invisible sovereignty; but it refers also to ill-founded beliefs, 
mistaken judgments, to that whole background of errors 
inseparable from madness. The fundamental discourse of 
delirium, in its constitutive powers, thus reveals to what extent, 
despite analogies of form, despite the rigor of its meaning, it was 
not a discourse of reason. It spoke, but in the night of blindness; 
it was more than the loose and disordered text of a dream, since 
it deceived itself; but it was more than an erroneous proposition, 
since it was plunged into that total obscurity which is that of 
sleep. Delirium, as the principle of madness, is a system of false 
propositions in the general syntax of the dream. 

Madness is precisely at the point of contact between the 
oneiric and the erroneous; it traverses, in its variations, the 
surface on which they meet, the surface which both joins and 
separates them. With error, madness shares non-truth, and 
arbitrariness in affirmation or negation; from the dream, 
madness borrows the flow of images and the colorful presence of 
hallucinations. But while error is merely non-truth, while the 
dream neither affirms nor judges, madness fills the void of error 
with images, and links hallucinations by affirmation of the false. 
In a sense, it is thus plenitude, joining to the figures of night the 
powers of day, to the forms of fantasy the activity of the waking 
mind; it links the dark content with the forms of light. But is not 
such plenitude actually the culmination of the void? The presence 
of images offers no more than night-ringed hallucinations, 
figures inscribed at the corners of sleep, hence detached from any 
sensuous reality; however vivid they are, however rigorously 
established in the body, these images are nothingness, since they 
represent nothing; as for erroneous judgment, it judges only in 


116 


appearance: affirming nothing true or real, it does not affirm at 
all; it is ensnared in the non-being of error. 

Joining vision and blindness, image and judgment, 
hallucination and language, sleep and waking, day and night, 
madness is ultimately nothing, for it unites in them all that is 
negative. But the paradox of this nothing is to manifest itself, to 
explode in signs, in words, in gestures. Inextricable unity of order 
and disorder, of the reasonable being of things and this 
nothingness of madness! For madness, if it is nothing, can 
manifest itself only by departing from itself, by assuming an 
appearance in the order of reason and thus becoming the 
contrary of itself. Which illuminates the paradoxes of the 
classical experience: madness is always absent, in a perpetual 
retreat where it is inaccessible, without phenomenal or positive 
character; and yet it is present and perfectly visible in the singular 
evidence of the madman. Meaningless disorder as madness is, it 
reveals, when we examine it, only ordered classifications, 
rigorous mechanisms in soul and body, language articulated 
according to a visible logic. All that madness can say of itself is 
merely reason, though it is itself the negation of reason. In short, 
a rational hold over madness is always possible and necessary , to the 
very degree that madness is non-reason. 

There is only one word which summarizes this experience, 
Unreason', all that, for reason, is closest and most remote, 
emptiest and most complete; all that presents itself to reason in 
familiar structures—authorizing a knowledge, and then a science, 
which seeks to be positive—and all that is constantly in retreat 
from reason, in the inaccessible domain of nothingness. 

And if, now, we try to assign a value, in and of itself, outside 
its relations with the dream and with error, to classical unreason, 
we must understand it not as reason diseased, or as reason lost or 
alienated, but quite simply as reason dazzled. 

Dazzlement is night in broad daylight, the darkness that rules 


117 



at the very heart of what is excessive in light’s radiance. Dazzled 
reason opens its eyes upon the sun and sees nothing, that is, does 
not see\ in dazzlement, the recession of objects toward the depths 
of night has as an immediate correlative the suppression of vision 
itself; at the moment when it sees objects disappear into the 
secret night of light, sight sees itself in the moment of its 
disappearance. 

To say that madness is dazzlement is to say that the madman 
sees the daylight, the same daylight as the man of reason (both 
live in the same brightness); but seeing this same daylight, and 
nothing but this daylight and nothing in it, he sees it as void, as 
night, as nothing; for him the shadows are the way to perceive 
daylight. Which means that, seeing the night and the 
nothingness of the night, he does not see at all. And believing he 
sees, he admits as realities the hallucinations of his imagination 
and all the multitudinous population of night. That is why 
delirium and dazzlement are in a relation which constitutes the 
essence of madness, exactly as truth and light, in their 
fundamental relation, constitute classical reason. 

In this sense, the Cartesian formula of doubt is certainly the 
great exorcism of madness. Descartes closes his eyes and plugs up 
his ears the better to see the true brightness of essential daylight; 
thus he is secured against the dazzlement of the madman who, 
opening his eyes, sees only night, and not seeing at all, believes 
he sees when he imagines. In the uniform lucidity of his closed 
senses, Descartes has broken with all possible fascination, and if 
he sees, he is certain of seeing that which he sees. While before 
the eyes of the madman, drunk on a light which is darkness, rise 
and multiply images incapable of criticizing themselves (since the 
madman sees them), but irreparably separated from being (since 
the madman sees nothing). 

Unreason is in the same relation to reason as dazzlement to 
the brightness of daylight itself. And this is not a metaphor. We 
are at the center of the great cosmology which animates all 


118 



classical culture. The “cosmos” of the Renaissance, so rich in 
internal communications and symbolisms, entirely dominated by 
the interacting presence of the stars, has now disappeared, 
without “nature” having yet assumed its status of universality, 
without its having received man’s lyrical recognition, subjecting 
him to the rhythm of its seasons. What the classical thinkers 
retain of the “world,” what they already anticipate in “nature,” is 
an extremely abstract law, which nonetheless forms the most 
vivid and concrete opposition, that of day and night. This is no 
longer the fatal time of the planets, it is not yet the lyrical time of 
the seasons; it is the universal but absolutely divided time of 
brightness and darkness. A form which thought entirely masters 
in a mathematical science—Cartesian physics is a kind of 
mathesis of light—but which at the same time traces the great 
tragic caesura in human existence: one that dominates the 
theatrical time of Racine and the space of Georges de la Tour in 
the same imperious fashion. The circle of day and night is the 
law of the classical world: the most reduced but the most 
demanding of the world’s necessities, the most inevitable but the 
simplest of nature’s legalities. 

A law which excludes all dialectic and all reconciliation; which 
establishes, consequently, both the flawless unity of knowledge 
and the uncompromising division of tragic existence; it rules over 
a world without twilight, which knows no effusion, nor the 
attenuated cares of lyricism; everything must be either waking or 
dream, truth or darkness, the light of being or the nothingness of 
shadow. Such a law prescribes an inevitable order, a serene 
division which makes truth possible and confirms it forever. 

And yet on either side of this order, two symmetrical, inverse 
figures bear witness that there are extremities where it can be 
transgressed, showing at the same time to what degree it is 
essential not to transgress it. On one side, tragedy. The rule of 
the theatrical day has a positive content; it forces tragic duration 
to be poised upon the singular but universal alternation of day 


119 



and night; the whole of the tragedy must be accomplished in this 
unity of time, for tragedy is ultimately nothing but the 
confrontation of two realms, linked to each other by time itself, 
in the irreconcilable. Every day, in Racine’s theater, is overhung 
by a night, which it brings, so to speak, to light: the night of 
Troy and its massacres, the night of Nero’s desires, Titus’s 
Roman night, Athalie’s night. These are the great stretches of 
night, realms of darkness which haunt the day without yielding 
an hour, and disappear only in the new night of death. And these 
fantastic nights, in their turn, are haunted by a light which forms 
a kind of infernal reflection of the day: the burning of Troy, the 
torches of the Praetorians, the pale light of the dream. In 
classical tragedy, day and night are arranged like a pair of 
mirrors, endlessly reflect each other, and afford that simple 
couple a sudden profundity which envelops in a single movement 
all of man’s life and his death. In the same fashion, in De la 
Tour’s Madeleine au miroir , light and shadow confront each other 
divide and at the same time unite a face and its reflection, a skull 
and its image, a vigil and a silence; and in the Image Saint-Alexis , 
the page holding the torch reveals under the shadow of the vault 
the man who was his master—a grave and luminous boy 
encounters all of human misery; a child brings death to light. 

On the other side, facing tragedy and its hieratic language, is 
the confused murmur of madness. Here, too, the great law of the 
division has been violated; shadow and light mingle in the fury of 
madness, as in the tragic disorder. But in another mode. In 
night, the tragic character found a somber truth of day; the night 
of Troy remained Andromache’s truth, as Athalie’s night 
presaged the truth of the already advancing day; night, 
paradoxically, revealed ; it was the profoundest day of being. The 
madman, conversely, finds in daylight only the inconsistency of 
the night’s figures; he lets the light be darkened by all the 
illusions of the dream; his day is only the most superficial night oj 
appearance. It is to this degree that tragic man, more than any 


120 



other, is engaged in being, is the bearer of his truth, since, like 
Phedre, he flings in the face of the pitiless sun all the secrets of 
the night; while the madman is entirely excluded from being. 
And how could he not be, lending as he does the day s illusory 
reflection to the night’s non-being? 

We understand that the tragic hero—in contrast to the 
baroque character of the preceding period—can never be mad; 
and that conversely madness cannot bear within itself those 
values of tragedy, which we have known since Nietzsche and 
Artaud. In the classical period, the man of tragedy and the man 
of madness confront each other, without a possible dialogue, 
without a common language; for the former can utter only the 
decisive words of being, uniting in a flash the truth of light and 
the depth of darkness; the latter endlessly drones out the 
indifferent murmur which cancels out both the day’s chatter and 
the lying dark. 

Madness designates the equinox between the vanity of night’s 
hallucinations and the non-being of light’s judgments. 

And this much, which the archaeology of knowledge has been 
able to teach us bit by bit, was already offered to us in a simple 
tragic fulguration, in the last words of Andromaque. 

As if, at the moment when madness was vanishing from the 
tragic act, at the moment when tragic man was to separate 
himself for over two centuries from the man of unreason—as if, 
at this very moment, an ultimate figuration were demanded of 
madness. The curtain which falls on the last scene of 
Andromaque also falls on the last of the great tragic incarnations 
of madness. But in this presence on the threshold of its own 
disappearance, in this madness incarcerating itself for good, is 
articulated what it is and will be for the entire classical age. Is it 
not precisely at the moment of its disappearance that it can best 
present its truth, its truth of absence, its truth which is that of 
day at the limits of night? This had to be the last scene of the 


121 



first great classical tragedy; or if one prefers, the first time in 
which the classical truth of madness is expressed in a tragic 
movement which is the last of the preclassical theater. A truth, in 
any case, that is instantaneous, since its appearance can only be 
its disappearance; the lightning-flash is seen only in the already 
advancing night. 

Orestes, in his frenzy, passes through a triple circle of night: 
three concentric figurations of dazzlement. Day has just dawned 
over Pyrrhus’s palace; night is still there, edging this light with 
shadow, and peremptorily indicating its limit. On this morning 
which is a festival morning, the crime has been committed, and 
Pyrrhus has closed his eyes on the dawning day: a fragment of 
shadow cast here on the steps of the altar, on the threshold of 
brightness and of darkness. The two great cosmic themes of 
madness are thus present in various forms, as omen, decor, and 
counterpoint of Orestes’ frenzy. 1 It can then begin: in a pitiless 
clarity which denounces the murder of Pyrrhus and the treachery 
of Hermione, in that dawn where everything finally explodes in a 
truth so old and at the same time so young, a first circle of 
shadow: a dark cloud into which, all around Orestes, the world 
begins to withdraw; the truth appears in this paradoxical 
twilight, in this matinal night where the cruelty of truth will be 
transformed into the fury of hallucination: 

Mais quelle epaisse nuit , tout a coup , menvironne? 

(But what thick night suddenly surrounds me?) 

It is the empty night of error ; but against the background of 
this first obscurity, a brilliance, a false light will appear: that of 
images. The nightmare rises, not in the bright light of morning, 
but in a somber scintillation: the light of storm and of murder. 

Dieux! quels ruisseaux de sang coulent autour de moil 

(O Gods! What streams of blood flow around me!) 

And then appears the dynasty of the dream. In this night the 


122 


hallucinations are set free; the Erinnyes appear and take over. 
What makes them precarious also makes them sovereign; they 
triumph easily in the solitude where they succeed one another; 
nothing challenges them; images and language intersect, in 
apostrophes which are invocations, presences affirmed and 
repulsed, solicited and feared. But all these images converge 
toward night, toward a second night which is that of 
punishment, of eternal vengeance, of death within death. The 
Erinnyes are recalled to that darkness which is their own—their 
birthplace and their truth, i.e., their own nothingness. 

Venez-vous m’enlever dans reternelle nuitf 

(Do you come to bear me off into eternal night?) 

This is the moment when it is revealed that the images of 
madness are only dream and error, and if the sufferer who is 
blinded by them appeals to them, it is only to disappear with 
them in the annihilation to which they are fated. 

A second time, then, we pass through a circle of night. But we 
are not thereby restored to the daylight reality of the world. We 
accede, beyond what is manifested in madness, to delirium , to 
that essential and constitutive structure which had secretly 
sustained madness from the first. This delirium has a name, 
Hermione; Hermione who no longer reappears as a hallucinatory 
vision, but as the ultimate truth of madness. It is significant that 
Hermione intervenes at this very moment of the frenzy: not 
among the Eumenides, nor ahead of them—to guide them; but 
behind and separated from them by the night into which they 
have dragged Orestes and in which they themselves are now 
scattered. Hermione intervenes as a figure of delirium, as the 
truth which secretly reigned from the start, and of which the 
Eumenides were ultimately only the servants. Here we are at the 
opposite of Greek tragedy, where the Erinnyes were the final 
destiny and truth which, in the night of time, had awaited the 
hero; his passion was merely their instrument. Here the 


123 



Eumenides are merely figures in the service of delirium, the 
primary and ultimate truth, which was already appearing in 
passion, and now declares itself in its nakedness. This truth rules 
alone, thrusting images away: 

Mais non , retirez-vous, laissez faire Hermione. 

(But no, begone, let Hermione do her work.) 

Hermione, who has always been present from the beginning, 
Hermione who has always lacerated Orestes, destroying his 
reason bit by bit, Hermione for whom he has become “parricide, 
assassin , sacrilege , ” reveals herself finally as the truth and 
culmination of his madness. And delirium, in its rigor, no longer 
has anything to say except to articulate as imminent decision a 
truth long since commonplace and laughable: 

Et je luiporte enfin mon coeur a de'vorer. 

(And I bring her at last my heart to devour.) 

Days and years ago Orestes had offered up this savage 
sacrifice. But now he expresses this principle of his madness as 
an end. For madness cannot go any farther. Having uttered its 
truth in its essential delirium, it can do no more than collapse in 
a third night, that night from which there is no return, the night 
of an incessant devouring. Unreason can appear only for a 
moment, the instant when language enters silence, when 
delirium itself is stilled, when the heart is at last devoured. 

In the tragedies of the early seventeenth century, madness, 
too, released drama; but it did so by liberating truth; madness 
still had access to language, to a renewed language of explanation 
and of reality reconquered. It could be at most only the 
penultimate moment of the tragedy. Not the last, as in 
Andromaque , in which no truth is uttered except the truth, in 
delirium, of a passion which has found with madness the 
perfection of its fulfillment. 

The movement proper to unreason, which classical learning 


124 



followed and pursued, had already accomplished the whole of its 
trajectory in the concision of tragic language. After which, 
silence could reign, and madness disappear in the—always 
withdrawn—presence of unreason. 

What we now know of unreason affords us a better 
understanding of what confinement was. 

This gesture, which banished madness to a neutral and 
uniform world of exclusion, did not mark a halt in the evolution 
of medical techniques, nor in the progress of humanitarian ideas. 
It assumed its precise meaning in this fact: that madness in the 
classical period ceased to be the sign of another world, and that it 
became the paradoxical manifestation of non-being. Ultimately, 
confinement did seek to suppress madness, to eliminate from the 
social order a figure which did not find its place within it; the 
essence of confinement was not the exorcism of a danger. 
Confinement merely manifested what madness, in its essence, 
was: a manifestation of non-being; and by providing this 
manifestation, confinement thereby suppressed it, since it 
restored it to its truth as nothingness. Confinement is the 
practice which corresponds most exactly to madness experienced 
as unreason, that is, as the empty negativity of reason; by 
confinement, madness is acknowledged to be nothing. That is, on 
one hand madness is immediately perceived as difference: 
whence the forms of spontaneous and collective judgment 
sought, not from physicians, but from men of good sense, to 
determine the confinement of a madman; and on the other hand, 
confinement cannot have any other goal than a correction (that 
is, the suppression of the difference, or the fulfillment of this 
nothingness in death); whence those options for death so often 
to be found in the registers of confinement, written by the 
attendants, and which are not the sign of confinement’s savagery, 
its inhumanity or perversion, but the strict expression of its 
meaning: an operation to annihilate nothingness.20 


125 


Confinement sketches, on the surface of phenomena and in a 
hasty moral synthesis, the secret and distinct structure of 
madness. 

Then did confinement establish its practices in this profound 
intuition? Was it because madness under the effect of 
confinement had really vanished from the classical horizon that it 
was ultimately stigmatized as non-being? Questions whose 
answers refer to each other in a perfect circularity. It is futile, no 
doubt, to lose oneself in the endless cycle of these forms of 
interrogation. Better to let classical culture formulate, in its 
general structure, the experience it had of madness, an experience 
which crops up with the same meanings, in the identical order of 
its inner logic, in both the order of speculation and the order of 
institutions, in both discourse and decree, in both word and 
watchword—wherever, in fact, a signifying element can assume 
for us the value of a language. 


126 



V 



127 


ASPECTS OF MADNESS 


IN this chapter we do not wish to write a history of the different 
notions of psychiatry in the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries, but rather to show the specific faces by which madness 
was recognized in classical thought. Faces still haunted by 
mythical figures, but which have often been essential in the 
organization of our practical knowledge. 


128 



I. Mania and Melancholia 


The notion of melancholia was fixed, in the sixteenth century, 
between a certain definition by symptoms and an explanatory 
principle concealed in the very term that designated it. Among 
the symptoms, we find all the delirious ideas an individual can 
form about himself: “Some think themselves to be beasts, whose 
voice and actions they imitate. Some think that they are vessels 
of glass, and for this reason recoil from passers-by, lest they 
break; others fear death, which they yet cause most often to 
themselves. Still others imagine that they are guilty of some 
crime, so that they tremble with terror when they see another 
coming toward them, thinking he seeks to take them prisoner 

and sentence them to death.” Delirious themes that remain 
isolated and do not compromise reason’s totality. Thomas 
Sydenham would even observe that melancholics “are people 
who, apart from their complaint, are prudent and sensible, and 
who have an extraordinary penetration and sagacity. Thus 
Aristotle rightly observed that melancholics have more 
intelligence than other men.” 

Now this clear and coherent syndrome was designated by a 
word that implied an entire causal system, that of melancholia: “I 
beg you to regard closely the thoughts of melancholies, their 
words, visions, actions, and you will discover how all their senses 
are depraved by a melancholic humor spread through their 
brain.”2 Partial delirium and the action of black bile were 
juxtaposed in the notion of melancholia, unrelated for the 
moment beyond a disjunct confrontation of a group of signs by a 
signifying name. Yet in the eighteenth century a unity would be 
found, or rather an exchange would be made—the nature of that 
cold, black humor having become the major coloration of 
delirium, its positive value in contrast to mania, dementia, and 


129 


frenzy, its essential principle of cohesion. And while Hermann 
Boerhaave still defined melancholia as merely “a long, persistent 
delirium without fever, during which the sufferer is obsessed by 
only one thought,” Dufour, several years later, shifted the weight 
of his definition to “fear and sadness,” which were now supposed 
to explain the partial character of the delirium: “Hence it is that 
melancholies love solitude and shun company; this makes them 
more attached to the object of their delirium or to their 
dominant passion, whatever it may be, while they seem 
indifferent to anything else.” The concept is fixed not by a new 
rigor in observation, nor by a discovery in the realm of causes, 
but by a qualitative transmission proceeding from a cause implied 
in the designation to a significant perception in the effects. 

For a long time—until the beginning of the seventeenth 
century—the discussion of melancholia remained fixed within 
the tradition of the four humors and their essential qualities: 
stable qualities actually inherent in a substance, which alone 
could be considered as their cause. For Jean Fernel, the 
melancholic humor, related to earth and to autumn, is a juice 
“thick in consistency, cold and dry in temperament.” But in the 
first half of the century, a debate began over the origin of 
melancholia: must one necessarily have a melancholic 
temperament to be afflicted with melancholia? Is the 
melancholic humor always cold and dry—is it never warm, or 
humid? Is it the substance which acts, or the qualities which are 
transmitted? The results of this long debate may be summarized 
as follows: 

1. The causality of substances is increasingly replaced by a 
movement of qualities , which, without any vehicular means, are 
immediately transmitted from body to soul, from humor to ideas, 
from organs to conduct. Thus, for Duncan’s Apologist the best 
proof that the melancholic juice produces melancholia is that in 
it one finds the very qualities of the disease: “The melancholic 
juice possesses to a far greater degree the conditions necessary to 


130 



produce melancholia than your fiery angers; since by its coldness, 
it diminishes the quantity of spirits; by its dryness, it renders 
them capable of preserving for a long time the type of a strong 
and persistent imagination; and by its blackness, it deprives them 
of their natural clarity and subtlety.”3 

2. There is, besides this mechanics of qualities, a dynamics 
that analyzes the strength to be found imprisoned in each. Thus 
cold and dryness can enter into conflict with the temperament, 
and this opposition will generate symptoms of melancholia 
violent in proportion to the struggle: the strength that prevails 
and sweeps away all that resists it. Thus women, whose nature is 
little inclined to melancholy, fall a prey to it all the more 
seriously: “They are cruelly used and violently disturbed by it, for 
melancholia being more opposed to their temperament, it 
removes them further from their natural constitution. ”4 

3. But it is sometimes within the quality itself that the conflict 
is generated. A quality may alter in the course of its development 
and become the opposite of what it was. Thus when “the entrails 
are heated, when all simmers within the body ... and all the 
juices are consumed,” then this conflagration can turn to cold 
melancholia—producing “almost the same thing caused by the 
flow of wax in a torch turned upside down.... This cooling of the 
body is the ordinary effect which follows immoderate heat once 
it has thrown off and exhausted its vigor. ”5 There is a kind of 
dialectic of qualities which, free from any constraint of substance, 
from any predetermination, makes its way through reversals and 
contradictions. 

4. Finally, qualities may be altered by accidents, circumstances, 
the conditions of life; so that a being who is dry and cold can 
become warm and humid, if his way of life inclines him to it; as 
in the case of women: they “remain in idleness, their bodies tend 
to perspire less [than those of men], and heat, spirits, and 
humors remain within.”6 


131 


Thus freed from a confining substantial basis, qualities would 
be able to play an organizing and integrating role in the notion 
of melancholia. On the one hand, they would trace, among the 
symptoms and manifestations, a certain profile of sadness, of 
blackness, of slowness, of immobility. On the other, they would 
suggest a causal basis which would no longer be the physiology 
of a humor, but the pathology of an idea, of a fear, of a terror. 
The morbid entity was not defined from observed signs nor from 
supposed causes; but somewhere between, and beyond both, it 
was perceived as a certain qualitative coherence, which had its 
own laws of transmission, of development, and of 
transformation. It is the secret logic of this quality that controls 
the development of the idea of melancholia, not medical theory. 
This is evident as early as Thomas Willis’s texts. 

At first glance, the coherence of their analyses is vouched for 
on the level of speculative reflection. Willis’s explanation is 
borrowed whole from animal spirits and their mechanical 
properties. Melancholia is “a madness without fever or frenzy, 
accompanied by fear and sadness.” To the extent that it is 
delirium—that is, an essential break with truth—its origin 
resides in a disordered movement of the spirits and in a defective 
state of the brain; but can that fear, that anxiety which makes 
melancholics “sad and punctilious,” be explained by movements 
alone? Might there be a mechanism of fear and a circulation of 
spirits that is peculiar to sadness? This is obvious to Descartes; it 
is no longer so for Willis. Melancholia cannot be treated like a 
paralysis, an apoplexy, a vertigo, or a convulsion. In fact, it 
cannot even be analyzed as a simple dementia, although 
melancholic delirium supposes a similar disorder in the 
movement of spirits; disturbances in the mechanism easily 
explain delirium—that error common to all madness, dementia 
or melancholia—but not the quality peculiar to delirium, the 
coloration of sadness and fear which makes its landscape so 
unique. One must penetrate the secret of predispositions. After 


132 



all, it is these essential qualities, hidden in the very grain of the 
subtle matter, that explain the paradoxical movements of the 
spirits. 

In melancholia, the spirits are swept by an agitation, but a 
feeble agitation, without power or violence: a sort of impotent 
jostling which does not follow marked paths, nor open roads 
(aperta opercula ), but traverses the cerebral matter by endlessly 
creating new pores; yet the spirits do not wander far upon the 
paths they trace; very soon their agitation languishes, their 

strength fails, and the movement stops: “they do not reach far.”? 
Thus such disturbance, common to all delirium, can produce on 
the surface of the body neither those violent movements nor 
those cries that may be observed in mania and frenzy; 
melancholia never reaches violence; it is madness at the limits of 
its powerless ness. This paradox is the result of the secret 
alterations of the spirits. Usually they have the quasi-immediate 
rapidity and the absolute transparence of luminous rays; but in 
melancholia, they are charged with darkness; they become 
“obscure, opaque, shadowy”; and the images of things which they 
bear to the brain and to the mind are veiled with “shadow and 
with shades.” They become heavy and closer to a dark chemical 
vapor than to pure light. A chemical vapor that would be of an 
acid nature, rather than sulfurous or alcoholic: for in acid vapors 
the particles are mobile, and even incapable of rest, but their 
activity is weak, without effect; when they are distilled, nothing 
remains in the alembic but an insipid phlegm. Do not acid 
vapors have the very properties of melancholia, whereas alcoholic 
vapors, always ready to burst into flame, suggest frenzy; and 
sulfurous vapors, agitated by a violent and continuous movement, 
indicate mania? If, then, one were to seek “the formal reason and 
the causes” of melancholia, one would consider the vapors that 
rise from the blood to the brain and that have degenerated into 
an acid and corrosive vapor. In appearance, it is a melancholia of 


133 


the spirits, a chemistry of the humors that oriented Willis’s 
analysis; but in fact, the principal clue is afforded by the 
immediate qualities of melancholic suffering: an impotent 
disorder, and then that shadow over the mind, along with that 
acid bitterness which corrodes thought and feeling alike. The 
chemistry of acids is not the explanation of the symptoms; it is a 
qualitative option: a phenomenology of melancholic experience. 

Some seventy years later, animal spirits lost their scientific 
prestige. Now it was from the body’s liquid and solid elements 
that the secret of disease was sought. The Medical Dictionary 
which Robert James published in England in 1743 proposes, 
under Mania , a comparative etiology of that disease and of 
melancholia: “It is evident that the brain is the seat ... of all 
diseases of this nature.... It is there that the Creator has fixed, 
although in a manner which is inconceivable, the lodging of the 
soul, the mind, genius, imagination, memory, and all sensations. 
... All these noble functions will be changed, depraved, 
diminished, and totally destroyed, if the blood and the humors 
corrupted in quality and quantity are no longer carried to the 
brain in a uniform and temperate manner, but instead circulate 
there with violence and impetuosity, or move about slowly, with 
difficulty or with languor.” It is this languishing flow, these 
choked vessels, this heavy, clogged blood that the heart labors to 
distribute throughout the organism, and which has difficulty 
penetrating into the very fine arterioles of the brain, where the 
circulation ought to be very rapid in order to maintain the 
movement of thought—it is all this distressing obstruction which 
explains melancholia. Heaviness, encumbrance—here again the 
primitive qualities guide analysis. The explanation becomes a 
transfer to the organism of qualities perceived in the condition, 
the conduct, the words of the sick person. We move from 
qualitative apprehension to supposed explanation. But it is this 
apprehension that continues to prevail and always wins out over 
theoretical coherence. Anne-Charles Lorry juxtaposes the two 


134 



main forms of medical explanation—by solids and by fluids— 
and ultimately causes them to intersect, thus distinguishing two 
kinds of melancholia. The one whose origin is in solids is 
nervous melancholia: a particularly strong sensation agitates the 
fibers which receive it; as a result, tension increases in the other 
fibers, which become more rigid and at the same time susceptible 
to further vibration. But should the sensation become even 
stronger, then the tension increases to such a degree in the other 
fibers that they become incapable of vibrating; the state of 
rigidity is such that the flow of blood is stopped and the animal 
spirits immobilized. Melancholia has set in. In the other form of 
disease, the “liquid form,” the humors are impregnated with 
black bile; they become thicker; clogged with these humors, the 
blood thickens and stagnates in the meninges until it compresses 
the principal organs of the nervous system. Then we find again 
the rigidity of the fibers, but in this case it is no more than a 
consequence of a humoral phenomenon. Lorry distinguishes two 
melancholias: actually it is the same group of qualities, affording 
melancholia its real unity, that he employs successively in two 
explanatory systems. Only the theoretical edifice has been 
doubled. The qualitative basis in experience remains the same. 

A symbolic unity formed by the languor of the fluids, by the 
darkening of the animal spirits and the shadowy twilight they 
spread over the images of things, by the viscosity of the blood 
that laboriously trickles through the vessels, by the thickening of 
vapors that have become blackish, deleterious, and acrid, by 
visceral functions that have become slow and somehow slimy— 
this unity, more a product of sensibility than of thought or 
theory, gives melancholia its characteristic stamp. 

It is this undertaking, more than faithful observation, which 
reorganizes melancholias symptoms and mode of appearance. 
The theme of a partial delirium increasingly disappears as a 
major symptom of melancholics in favor of qualitative data like 
sadness, bitterness, a preference for solitude, immobility. At the 


135 



end of the eighteenth century, all forms of madness without 
delirium, but characterized by inertia, by despair, by a sort of dull 
stupor, would be readily classified as melancholia.8 And as early 
as James’s Dictionary , an apoplectic melancholia is discussed, in 
which the sufferers “refuse to rise from their beds...; once on 
their feet, they will not walk unless they are forced by their 
friends or attendants; they in no way avoid others, but they seem 
to pay no attention to what is said to them; they make no 
answer.” If, in this case, immobility and silence prevail and 
determine the diagnosis of melancholia, there are cases in which 
one observes only bitterness, languor, and a preference for 
isolation; their very agitation must not deceive the observer nor 
authorize a hasty diagnosis of mania; these patients are definitely 
suffering from melancholia, for “they avoid company, prefer 
solitary places, and wander without knowing where they are 
going; they have a yellowish color, a dry tongue as in a person 
suffering from great thirst, and their eyes are dry, hollow, never 
moistened with tears; their entire body is dry and burning hot, 
their face dark, and expressing only horror and sadness.”9 

The analyses of mania and their evolution during the classical 
period obey the same principles of coherence. 

Willis opposes mania to melancholia. The mind of the 
melancholic is entirely occupied by reflection, so that his 
imagination remains at leisure and in repose; the maniac’s 
imagination, on the contrary, is occupied by a perpetual flux of 
impetuous thoughts. While the melancholic’s mind is fixed on a 
single object, imposing unreasonable proportions upon it, but 
upon it alone, mania deforms all concepts and ideas; either they 
lose their congruence, or their representative value is falsified; in 
any case, the totality of thought is disturbed in its essential 
relation to truth. Melancholia, finally, is always accompanied by 
sadness and fear; on the contrary, in the maniac we find audacity 


136 


and fury. Whether it is a question of mania or melancholia, the 
cause of the disease is always in the movement of the animal 
spirits. But this movement is quite particular in mania: it is 
continuous, violent, always capable of piercing new pores in the 
cerebral matter, and it creates, as the material basis of incoherent 
thoughts, explosive gestures, continuous words which betray 
mania. Is not such pernicious mobility that of an infernal water, 
sulfurous liquid, those aquae stygiae , ex nitro , vitriolo , antimonio , 
arsenico , et similibus exstillatae : its particles are in perpetual 
movement; they are capable of provoking new pores and new 
channels in any substance; and they have strength enough to 
spread themselves far, exactly as the maniacal spirits are capable 
of spreading agitation through all the parts of the body. An 
infernal water gathers in the secrecy of its movements all the 
images in which mania takes its concrete form. It constitutes, in 
an indissociable way, both its chemical myth and its dynamic 
truth. 

In the course of the eighteenth century, the image, with all its 
mechanical and metaphysical implications, of animal spirits in 
the channels of the nerves, was frequently replaced by the image, 
more strictly physical but of an even more symbolic value, of a 
tension to which nerves, vessels, and the entire system of organic 
fibers were subject. Mania was thus a tension of the fibers carried 
to its paroxysm, the maniac a sort of instrument whose strings, 
by the effect of an exaggerated traction, began to vibrate at the 
remotest and faintest stimulus. Maniacal delirium consisted of a 
continual vibration of the sensibility. Through this image, the 
differences from melancholia became precise and were organized 
into a rigorous antithesis: the melancholic can no longer enter 
into a resonance with the external world, because his fibers are 
relaxed or because they have been immobilized by too great a 
tension (we see how the mechanics of tension explains 
melancholic immobility as well as maniacal agitation): only a few 
fibers vibrate in the melancholic, those which correspond to the 


137 



precise point of his delirium. On the contrary, the maniac 
vibrates to any and every stimulus; his delirium is universal; 
stimuli do not vanish into the density of his immobility, as in the 
melancholic’s case; when his organism returns them, they have 
been multiplied, as if the maniac had accumulated a 
supplementary energy in the tension of his fibers. It is this very 
fact, moreover, that makes the maniac, in his turn, insensible, 
not with the somnolent insensibility of the melancholic, but with 
an insensibility taut with interior vibrations; this is doubtless why 
maniacs “fear neither heat nor cold, tear off their clothes, sleep 
naked in the dead of winter without feeling the cold.” It is also 
why they substitute for the real world, which nonetheless 
continues to solicit them, the unreal and chimerical world of 
their delirium: “The essential symptoms of mania result from the 
fact that objects do not present themselves to the sufferers as 
they are in reality.”!0 The delirium of maniacs is not determined 
by a particular error of judgment; it constitutes a defect in the 
transmission of sense impressions to the brain, a flaw in 
communication. In the psychology of madness, the old idea of 
truth as “the conformity of thought to things” is transposed in 
the metaphor of a resonance, a kind of musical fidelity of the 
fibers to the sensations which make them vibrate. 

This theme of manic tension develops, beyond a medicine of 
solids, into intuitions that are still more qualitative. The rigidity 
of fibers in a maniac always belongs to a dry landscape; mania is 
regularly accompanied by a wasting of the humors, and by a 
general aridity in the entire organism. The essence of mania is 
desertic, sandy. Theophile Bonet, in his Sepulchretum 
anatomicum, declares that the brains of maniacs, insofar as he 
had been able to observe them, always seemed to be in a state of 
dryness, of hardness, and of friability. Later, Albrecht von Haller 
also found that the maniac’s brain was hard, dry, and brittle. 
Menuret repeats an observation of Forestier’s that clearly shows 


138 


how an excessive loss of a humor, by drying out the vessels and 
fibers, may provoke a state of mania; this was the case of a young 
man who “having married his wife in the summertime, became 
maniacal as a result of the excessive intercourse he had with her.” 

What some imagined or supposed, what others saw in a quasi¬ 
perception, Dufour proved, numbered, named. During an 
autopsy, he removed part of the medullary substance from the 
brain of a subject who had died in a state of mania; he cut out “a 
cube six lines in each direction” the weight of which was 3 j.g. 
Ill, while the same volume taken from an ordinary brain 
weighed 3 j.g. V: “this inequality in weight, which seems at first 
of little consequence, is no longer so slight if we consider the fact 
that the specific difference between the total mass of the brain of 
a madman and that of a normal man is around 7 gros less in the 
adult, in whom the brain’s entire mass ordinarily weighs three 
limes .” Mania’s dessication and lightness show even on the scale. 

Were not this internal dryness and this heat further proved by 
the ease with which maniacs endured great cold? It was an 
established fact that they had been seen walking naked in the 
snow, that there was no need to warm them when they were 
confined in the asylum, that they could even be cured by cold. 
Since Jean-Baptiste van Helmont, the immersion of maniacs in 
ice water had been widely practiced, and Menuret states that he 
knew a maniac who, having escaped from the prison where he 
was kept, “walked several leagues in a violent rain without a hat 
and almost without clothing, and who by this means recovered 
perfect health.” Montchau, who cured a maniac by “pouring ice 
water upon him, from as high above as possible,” was not 
astonished by so favorable a result; to explain it he united all the 
themes of organic calefaction that had succeeded and intersected 
each other since the seventeenth century: “One need not be 
surprised that ice water produces such a prompt and perfect cure 
precisely when boiling blood, furious bile, and mutinous liquors 
carried disturbance and irritation everywhere”; by the impression 


139 



of coldness, “the vessels contracted more violently and freed 
themselves of the liquors that crammed them; the irritation of 
the solid parts caused by the extreme heat of the liquors they 
contained ceased, and when the nerves relaxed, the course of the 
spirits that had proceeded irregularly from one side to the other 
was re-established in its natural state.” 

The world of melancholia was humid, heavy, and cold; that of 
mania was parched, dry, compounded of violence and fragility; a 
world which heat—unfelt but everywhere manifested—made 
arid, friable, and always ready to relax under the effect of a moist 
coolness. In the development of all these qualitative 
simplifications, mania attained both its full scope and its unity. It 
has doubtless remained what it was at the beginning of the 
seventeenth century, “fury without fever,” but beyond these two 
characteristics, which were still only descriptive , there developed a 
perceptual theme which was the real organizer of the clinical 
picture. Once the explanatory myths disappeared, and humors, 
spirits, solids, fluids no longer had any currency, there would 
remain only the schema of coherent qualities which would no 
longer even be named, and what this dynamics of heat and 
movement slowly formed into a constellation characteristic of 
mania would now be observed as a natural complex, as an 
immediate truth of psychological observation. What had been 
perceived as heat, imagined as agitation of spirits, conceived as 
fibrous tension, would henceforth be recognized in the 
neutralized transparency of psychological notions: exaggerated 
vivacity of internal impressions, rapidity in the association of 
ideas, inattention to the external world. De la Rive’s description 
already has this limpidity: “External objects do not produce upon 
the mind of a sufferer the same impression as upon the mind of a 
healthy man; these impressions are weak, and the sufferer rarely 
heeds them; his mind is almost entirely absorbed by the action of 
the ideas produced by the deranged state of his brain. These 
ideas have such a degree of vivacity that the sufferer believes they 


140 



represent real objects, and judges accordingly.” But we must not 
forget that this psychological structure of mania, as it appeared 
and was stabilized at the end of the eighteenth century, is only 
the superficial sketch of an entire profound organization, which 
itself would capsize and which had developed according to the 
half-perceptual, half-iconographic laws of a qualitative world. 

No doubt this entire universe of heat and cold, of humidity 
and dryness, reminded medical thought, about to accede to 
positivism, of the circumstances of its own origin. But this 
blazon of images was not simply reminiscence; it was also an 
undertaking. In order to form the practical experience of mania 
or melancholia, this gravitation, against a background of images, 
of qualities attracted to each other by a whole system of sensuous 
and affective affinities was essential. If mania, if melancholia 
henceforth assumed the aspects our science knows them by, it is 
not because in the course of centuries we have learned to “open 
our eyes” to real symptoms; it is not because we have purified our 
perception to the point of transparency; it is because in the 
experience of madness, these concepts were organized around 
certain qualitative themes that lent them their unity, gave them 
their significant coherence, made them finally perceptible. We 
have passed from a simple notional description (fury without 
fever, delirious idee fixe) to a qualitative realm, apparently less 
organized, simpler, less precisely limited, but which alone was 
able to constitute recognizable, palpable units really present in the 
total experience of madness. The field of observation of these 
diseases was partitioned into landscapes that obscurely gave them 
their style and their structure. On the one hand, a sodden, almost 
diluvian world, where man remained deaf, blind, and numb to all 
that was not his one terror: a world simplified in the extreme, 
and immoderately enlarged in a single one of its details. On the 
other, a parched and desertic world, a panic world where all was 
flight, disorder, instantaneous gesture. It was the rigor of these 
themes in their cosmic form—not the approximations of an 


141 



observing caution—which organized the experience (already 
almost our own experience) of mania and melancholia. 

It is Willis, with his spirit of observation, the purity of his 
medical perception, whom we honor as the “discoverer” of the 
mania-melancholia alternation. Certainly Willis’s methods are of 
great interest, chiefly in this particular: the transition from one 
affection to the other is seen not as a phenomenon of observation 
for which it was then a matter of discovering the explanation, but 
rather as the consequence of a profound natural affinity which 
was of the order of their secret nature. Willis does not cite a 
single case of alternation which he had occasion to observe; what 
he first discovered was an internal relation which engendered 
strange metamorphoses: “After melancholia, we must consider 
mania, with which it has so many affinities that these complaints 
often change into one another”: it happens, in fact, that the 
melancholic predisposition, if aggravated, becomes frenzy; 
frenzy, on the contrary, when it decreases and loses its force, 
finally grows calm and turns to melancholic diathesis. A rigorous 
empiricism would see two related diseases here, or even two 
successive symptoms of the same disease. However, Willis does 
not pose the problem in terms of symptoms nor in terms of 
disease; he merely seeks the link connecting two states in the 
dynamics of animal spirits. In the melancholic, we remember, 
the spirits were somber and dim; they cast their shadows over the 
images of things and formed a kind of dark tide; in the maniac, 
on the contrary, the spirits seethed in a perpetual ferment; they 
were carried by an irregular movement, constantly repeated; a 
movement that eroded and consumed, and even without fever, 
sent out its heat. Between mania and melancholia, the affinity is 
evident: not the affinity of symptoms linked in experience, but 
the affinity—more powerful and so much more evident in the 
landscapes of the imagination—that unites in the same fire both 
smoke and flame. “If we can say that in melancholia, the brain 


142 



and the animal spirits are obscured by smoke and a dense vapor, 
mania seems to ignite a kind of conflagration hitherto muffled by 
them.” The flame in its rapid movement dissipates the smoke; 
but the smoke, when it falls back, smothers the flame and 
extinguishes its brightness. The combination of mania and 
melancholy is not, for Willis, a disease; it is a secret fire in which 
flame and smoke are in conflict; it is the vehicle of that light and 
that shadow. 

Virtually all of the physicians of the eighteenth century 
acknowledged the proximity of mania and melancholia. Several, 
however, refused to call them two manifestations of the same 
disease. Many observed a succession without perceiving a 
symptomatic unity. Sydenham prefers to divide the domain of 
mania itself: on one hand, ordinary mania—due to “an 
overexcited and too rapid blood”; on the other, a mania which, as 
a general rule, “degenerates into stupidity.” The latter “results 
from the weakness of the blood which too long a fermentation 
has deprived of its most spirituous parts.” Even more often, it is 
acknowledged that the succession of mania and melancholia is a 
phenomenon either of metamorphosis or of remote causality. For 
Joseph Lieutaud, a melancholia that lasts a long time and whose 
delirium is exacerbated loses its traditional symptoms and 
assumes a strange resemblance to mania: “the last stage of 
melancholia has many affinities with mania.” But the status of 
this analogy is not elaborated. For Dufour, the link is even 
looser: it is a remote causal connection, melancholia being able to 
provoke mania, as well as “worms in the frontal sinuses, or 
dilated or varicose vessels.” Without the support of an image, no 
observation succeeded in transforming the evidence of succession 
into a symptomatic structure that was both precise and essential. 

Of course the image of flame and smoke disappeared in 
Willis’s successors; but it was still by images that the work of 
organization was accomplished—images increasingly functional, 
more firmly fixed in the great physiological themes of circulation 


143 



and heating, increasingly remote from the cosmic figures Willis 
had borrowed them from. For Boerhaave and his commentator 
Gerard van Swieten, mania formed quite naturally the highest 
degree of melancholia—not only following a frequent 
metamorphosis, but as the result of a necessary dynamic 
sequence: the cerebral liquid, which stagnates in the melancholic, 
becomes agitated after a certain time, for the black bile that fills 
the viscera becomes by its very immobility “bitterer and more 
malignant”; there then form in it more acid and subtler elements 
which, carried to the brain by the blood, provoke the maniac’s 
great agitation. Mania is thus distinguished from melancholia 
only by a difference of degree: it is its natural consequence, it 
results from the same causes, and is ordinarily treated by the 
same remedies. For Friedrich Hoffmann, the unity of mania and 
melancholia is a natural effect of the laws of movement and 
shock; but what is pure mechanics on the level of principles 
becomes dialectics in the development of life and of disease. 
Melancholia, in effect, is characterized by immobility; in other 
words, the thickened blood congests the brain where it 
accumulates; where it ought to circulate, it tends to stop, 
immobilized by its heaviness. But if this heaviness retards 
movement, it also makes the shock more violent at the moment 
it occurs; the brain, the vessels by which it is traversed, its very 
substance, more violently jarred, tend to resist more, therefore to 
harden, and by this hardening the thickened blood is sent back 
more energetically; its movement increases and it is soon caught 
up in that agitation which is mania. We have thus passed quite 
naturally from the image of an immobile congestion to images of 
dryness, of hardness, of rapid movement, and this by a sequence 
in which the principles of classical mechanics are at every 
moment influenced, deflected, distorted by a fidelity to 
iconographic themes which are the true organizers of this 
functional unity. 

Subsequently other images will be added, but will no longer 


144 



play a constitutive role; they will function only as so many 
interpretive variations upon the theme of a previously acquired 
unity. Witness for example the explanation Spengler proposed 
for the alternation between mania and melancholia, borrowing 
its principle from the electric battery. First there is a 
concentration of nervous power and of its fluid in a certain 
region of the system; only this sector is agitated, all the rest is in 
a state of sleep: this is the melancholic phase. But when it 
reaches a certain degree of intensity, this local charge suddenly 
expands into the entire system, which it agitates violently for a 
certain time, until its discharge is complete: this is the manic 
episode. At this level of elaboration, the image is too complex 
and too complete, it is borrowed from a model too remote to 
have an organizing role in the perception of a pathological unity. 
It is, on the contrary, suggested by that perception, which itself is 
based on unifying, though much more elementary, images. 

It is these images which are secretly present in the text of 
James’s Dictionary , one of the first in which the manic-depressive 
cycle is given as an observed phenomenon, as a unity easily 
perceived by an unprejudiced scrutiny. “It is absolutely necessary 
to reduce melancholia and mania to a single species of disease, 
and consequently to consider them in one and the same glance, 
for we find from our experiments and our day-to-day 
observations that one and the other have the same origin and the 
same cause.... The most exact observations and our daily 
experience confirm the fact, for we see that melancholics, 
especially those in whom the disposition is inveterate, easily 
become maniacal, and when the mania ceases, the melancholia 
begins again, in such a way that there is a passage and return 
from one to the other after certain periods of time.’Tl What was 
constituted, in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, under 
the influence of images, was therefore a perceptual structure, and 
not a conceptual system or even a group of symptoms. The proof 


145 


of this is that, just as in a perception, qualitative transitions could 
occur without affecting the integrity of the figure. Thus William 
Cullen would discover in mania, as in melancholia, “a principal 
object of delirium”—and, inversely, would attribute melancholia 
to “a drier and firmer tissue of the brain s medullary substance.” 

The essential thing is that the enterprise did not proceed from 
observation to the construction of explanatory images; that on 
the contrary, the images assured the initial role of synthesis, that 
their organizing force made possible a structure of perception, in 
which at last the symptoms could attain their significant value 
and be organized as the visible presence of the truth. 


146 



II. Hysteria and Hypochondria 


Two problems arise where these are concerned. 

1. To what degree is it legitimate to treat them as mental 
diseases, or at least as forms of madness? 

2. Are we entitled to treat them together, as if they constituted 
a virtual couple, similar to that formed quite early by mania and 
melancholia? 

A glance at the classifications is enough to convince us; 
hypochondria does not always appear beside dementia and 
mania; hysteria is very rarely found there. Felix Plater mentioned 
neither one among the lesions of the senses; and at the end of 
the classical period, Cullen still catalogued them in another 
category than that of the vesanias: hypochondria among the 
“adynamias, or diseases which consist of a weakness or a loss of 
movement in the vital or animal functions”; hysteria among “the 
spasmodic affections of the natural functions.” 

Moreover, in nosographic charts one rarely finds these two 
diseases grouped in a logical proximity, or even combined in the 
form of an opposition. Sauvages classifies hypochondria among 
the hallucinations—“hallucinations that concern only the 
health”—hysteria among the forms of convulsion. Linnaeus 
employs the same distinctions. Are they not both faithful to the 
teaching of Willis, who had studied hysteria in his book De 
morbis convulsivis and hypochondria in the section of De anima 
brutorum which dealt with diseases of the head, giving it the 
name of passio colica? Here it is certainly a question of two quite 
different diseases: in one case, the overheated spirits are subject 
to a reciprocal pressure which may give the impression that they 
are exploding—provoking those irregular or preternatural 
movements whose insane aspect constitutes hysterical 
convulsions. On the contrary, in passio colica , the spirits are 


147 



irritated because of a matter that is hostile and inappropriate to 
them ( infest a et improportionnata) ; they then provoke 
disturbances, irritations, corrugationes in the sensitive fibers. 
Willis therefore advises us not to be surprised by certain 
analogies of symptoms: certainly, we have seen convulsions 
produce pains as if the violent movement of hysteria could 
provoke the sufferings of hypochondria. But the resemblances 
are deceptive. “The substance is not the same, but a little 
different.” 

But beneath these fixed distinctions of the nosographers, a 
slow labor was being performed which tended increasingly to 
identify hysteria and hypochondria, as two forms of one and the 
same disease. In 1725 Richard Blackmore published a Treatise oj 
the Spleen and Vapours , or Hypochondriacal and Hysterical 
Affections', in it the two illnesses were defined as two varieties of a 
single affection—either a “morbific constitution of the spirits” or 
a “disposition to leave their reservoirs and to consume 
themselves.” For Whytt, in the middle of the eighteenth century, 
the identification was complete; the system of symptoms is 
henceforth identical: “An extraordinary sensation of cold and 
heat, of pains in several parts of the body; syncopes and vaporous 
convulsions; catalepsy and tetanus; gas in the stomach and 
intestines; an insatiable appetite for food; vomiting of black 
matter; a sudden and abundant flow of clear, pale urine; marasma 
or nervous atrophy; nervous cough; palpitations of the heart; 
variations in the pulse; periodic headaches; vertigo and dizzy 
spells; diminution and failure of eyesight; depression, despair, 
melancholia or even madness; nightmares or incubi.” 

Moreover, during the classical period hysteria and 
hypochondria slowly joined the domain of mental diseases. 
Richard Mead could still write apropos of hypochondria: “It is an 
illness of the whole body.” And we must restore its true value to 
Willis’s text on hysteria: “Among the diseases of women, 
hysterical affection is of such bad repute that like the semi- 


148 



damnati it must bear the faults of numerous other affections; if a 
disease of unknown nature and hidden origin appears in a 
woman in such a manner that its cause escapes us, and that the 
therapeutic course is uncertain, we immediately blame the bad 
influence of the uterus, which, for the most part, is not 
responsible; and when we are dealing with an inhabitual 
symptom, we declare that there is a trace of hysteria hidden 
beneath it all, and what has so often been the subterfuge of so 
much ignorance we take as the object of our treatment and our 
remedies.” With all due regard to the traditional commentators 
on this text, which is inevitably cited in any study on hysteria, it 
does not mean that Willis suspected the absence of an organic 
basis in symptoms of hysterical affection. He merely says, and in 
an explicit way, that the idea of hysteria is a catchall for the 
fantasies, not of the person who is or believes himself ill, but of 
the ignorant doctor who pretends to know why. Nor does the 
fact that hysteria is classified by Willis among diseases of the 
head indicate that he considered it a disorder of the mind; but 
only that he attributed its origin to a change in the nature, the 
origin, and the initial course of the animal spirits. 

However, at the end of the eighteenth century, hypochondria 
and hysteria figured, almost without dispute, on the escutcheon 
of mental disease. In 1755 Alberti published at Halle his 
dissertation De morbis imaginariis hypochondriacorum\ and 
Lieutaud, while defining hypochondria by its spasms, recognized 
that “the mind is affected as much as and perhaps more than the 
body; hence the term hypochondriac has become almost an 
offensive name avoided by physicians who would please.” As for 
hysteria, Joseph Raulin no longer ascribes to it any organic 
reality, at least in his basic definition, establishing it from the 
start in a pathology of the imagination: “This disease in which 
women invent, exaggerate, and repeat all the various absurdities 
of which a disordered imagination is capable, has sometimes 
become epidemic and contagious.” 


149 



There were thus two essential lines of development, during the 
classical period, for hysteria and hypochondria. One united them 
to form a common concept which was that of a “disease of the 
nerves”; the other shifted their meaning and their traditional 
pathological basis—sufficiently indicated by their names—and 
tended to integrate them gradually into the domain of diseases of 
the mind, beside mania and melancholia. But this integration 
was not achieved, as in the case of mania and melancholia, on 
the level of primitive qualities, perceived and imagined in their 
iconographic values. We are dealing here with an entirely 
different type of integration. 

The physicians of the classical period certainly tried to 
discover the qualities peculiar to hysteria and hypochondria. But 
they never reached the point of perceiving that particular 
coherence, that qualitative cohesion which gave mania and 
melancholia their unique contour. All qualities were 
contradictorily invoked, each annulling the others, leaving 
untouched the problem of what was the ultimate nature of these 
two diseases. 

Often hysteria was perceived as the effect of an internal heat 
that spread throughout the entire body, an effervescence, an 
ebullition ceaselessly manifested in convulsions and spasms. Was 
this heat not related to the amorous ardor with which hysteria 
was so often linked, in girls looking for husbands and in young 
widows who had lost theirs? Hysteria was ardent, by nature; its 
symptoms referred more easily to an image than to an illness; 
that image was drawn by Jacques Ferrand, at the beginning of 
the seventeenth century, in all its material precision. In his 
Maladie d'amour ou melancholie erotique , he declared that women 
were more often distracted by love than men; but with what art 
they could dissimulate it! “In which their mien is similar to 
alembics featly resting upon cylinders, without one’s being able 
to see the fire from without, yet if one looks beneath the alembic, 


150 



and places one’s hand upon a woman’s heart, one will find in 
both places a fiery furnace.” An admirable image, in its symbolic 
weight, its affective overtones, and the referential play of its 
imagery. Long after Ferrand, one finds the qualifying theme of 
humid heat used to characterize the secret distillations of hysteria 
and of hypochondria; but the image yielded to a more abstract 
motif. Already in Nicolas Chesneau, the flame of the feminine 
alembic had grown quite colorless: “I say that the hysterical 
affection is not a simple one, but that we understand by this 
name several diseases caused by a malign vapor which arises in 
some way or other, is corrupted, and undergoes an extraordinary 
effervescence.” For others, on the contrary, the heat rising from 
the hypochondriac regions is completely dry: hypochondriacal 
melancholia is a “hot, dry” illness, caused by “humors of the like 
quality.” But some perceived no heat in either hysteria or 
hypochondria: the quality peculiar to these maladies was on the 
contrary languor, inertia, and a cold humidity like that of the 
stagnant humors: “I think that these affections [hypochondriacal 
and hysterical], when they last for some time, come from the 
fibers of the brain and the nerves when they are slack and 
therefore feeble, without action or elasticity; as a consequence of 
which the nervous fluid is impoverished and without force. ”12 
There is probably no text that bears better witness to the 
qualitative instability of hysteria than George Cheyne’s book The 
English Malady', according to Cheyne, the disease maintains its 
unity only in an abstract manner; its symptoms are dispersed into 
different qualitative regions and attributed to mechanisms that 
belong to each of these regions in its own right. All symptoms of 
spasm, cramp, and convulsion derive from a pathology of heat 
symbolized by “harmful, bitter, or acrimonious vapors.” On the 
contrary, all psychological or organic signs of weakness 
—“depression, syncopes, inactivity of the mind, lethargic torpor, 
melancholia, and sadness”—manifest a condition of fibers which 


151 


have become too humid or too weak, doubtless under the effect 
of cold, viscous, thick humors that obstruct the glands and the 
vessels, serous and sanguine alike. As for paralyses, they signify 
both a chilling and an immobilization of the fibers, “an 
interruption of vibrations,” frozen so to speak in the general 
inertia of solids. 

It was as difficult for the phenomena of hysteria and 
hypochondria to find a place within the compass of qualities as it 
was easy for mania and melancholia to be established there. 

The medicine of movement was just as indecisive in dealing 
with them, its analyses just as unstable. It was quite clear, at least 
to any perception that did not reject its own images, that mania 
was related to an excessive mobility; melancholia, on the 
contrary, to a diminution of movement. For hysteria and for 
hypochondria as well, the choice was a difficult one. Georg Ernst 
Stahl opts instead for an increasing heaviness of the blood, which 
becomes so abundant and so thick that it is no longer capable of 
circulating regularly through the portal vein; it has a tendency to 
stagnate, to collect there, and the crisis is a result “of the effort it 
makes to effect an issue either by the higher or the lower parts.” 
For Boerhaave, on the contrary, and for Van Swieten, hysterical 
movement is due to an excessive mobility of all the fluids, which 
become so volatile, so inconsistent, that they are agitated by the 
least movement: “In weak constitutions,” Van Swieten explains, 
“the blood is dissolved; it barely coagulates, the serum is thus 
without consistency, without quality; the lymph resembles the 
serum, as do the other fluids which the latter provides.... In this 
way, it becomes probable that the so-called immaterial hysterical 
affection and hypochondriacal disease derive from the 
dispositions of the particular state of the fibers.” It is to this 
sensibility, this mobility, that we must attribute the sufferings, 
the spasms, the singular pains so readily suffered by “young girls 
of pale complexion, and individuals too much given to study and 
meditation.” Hysteria is indiscriminately mobile or immobile, 


152 




fluid or dense, given to unstable vibrations or clogged by 
stagnant humors. No one has managed to discover the actual 
nature of its movements. 

We receive the same impression in the realm of chemical 
analogies: for Lange, hysteria is a product of fermentation, quite 
precisely of the fermentation “of salts, sent into different parts of 
the body,” with “the humors that are located there.” For others, 
it is of an alkaline nature. Michael Ettmiiller, on the contrary, 
considers that diseases of this kind belong to a chain of acid 
reactions, “the immediate cause being the acid rawness of the 
stomach; the chyle being acid, the quality of the blood is 
corrupted; it no longer furnishes spirits; the lymph is acid, the 
bile without strength; the nervous system suffers irritation, the 
digestive leaven, spoiled, is less volatile and too acid.” Viridet 
undertakes to reconstitute, apropos of “vapors which we 
experience,” a dialectic of alkalis and acids whose movements and 
violent collisions, in the brain and the nerves, provoke the signs 
of hysteria and hypochondria. Certain particularly volatile animal 
spirits are alkaline salts that move with great speed and transform 
themselves into vapors when they become too tenuous; but there 
are other vapors that are volatilized acids; the ether gives these 
latter enough movement to carry them to the brain and the 
nerves where, “encountering the alkalis, they cause infinite ills.” 

Strange, the qualitative instability of these hysterical and 
hypochondriacal illnesses; strange, the confusion of their 
dynamic properties and the secret nature of their chemistry! To 
the very degree that the diagnosis of mania and melancholia 
seemed simple in the context of qualities, so the decipherment of 
these illnesses seemed hesitant. No doubt, this imaginary 
landscape of qualities which was decisive for the constitution of 
the melancholia-mania couple remained secondary in the history 
of hysteria and hypochondria, where it probably played no more 
than the role of continually shifted scenery. The progress of 
hysteria did not lead, as did that of mania, through the world’s 


153 



obscure qualities reflected in a medical imagery. The space in 
which it assumed its dimensions was of another kind: that of the 
body, in the coherence of its organic values and its moral values. 

It is customary to credit Charles le Pois and Willis with 
liberating hysteria from the old myths of uterine displacement. 
Jean Liebault, translating or rather adapting Marinello’s book to 
seventeenth-century standards, still accepted, despite some 
restrictions, the idea of a spontaneous movement of the womb; if 
it shifted position “it was to be more at ease; not that this was 
done out of prudence, behest, or animal stimulus, but to preserve 
health and to experience the enjoyment of something delectable.” 
No doubt, it was no longer deemed possible for the womb to 
change place or to course through the body somersaulting as it 
went, for it was “strictly attached” by its neck, by ligaments, by 
vessels, and finally by the tunic of the peritoneum; yet it could 
change position: “And so the womb, though it be so strictly 
attached to the parts we have described that it may not change 
place, yet often changes position, and makes curious and so to 
speak petulant movements in the womans body. These 
movements are various: to wit, ascending, descending, 
convulsive, vagrant, prolapsed. The womb rises to the liver, 
spleen, diaphragm, stomach, breast, heart, lung, gullet, and 
head.” The physicians of the classical period were almost 
unanimous in refusing to accept such an explanation. 

At the beginning of the seventeenth century, Le Pois could 
write, speaking of hysterical convulsions: “Of all these one source 
is the father, and this not through sympathy but through 
idiopathy.” More precisely, their origin is in an accumulation of 
fluids toward the posterior part of the skull: “Just as a river results 
from the confluence of a quantity of smaller vessels which join to 
form it, so the sinuses that are on the surface of the brain and 
terminate in the posterior part of the head amass the liquid 
because of the head’s inclined position. The heat of the parts 


154 



then causes the liquid to warm and affect the origin of the 
nerves.” Willis, in his turn, makes a minute critique of the 
uterine explanation: it is especially from affections of the brain 
and the nervous system “that all the derangements and 
irregularities which obtain in the movement of the blood during 
this illness derive.” And yet all these analyses did not thereby 
abolish the idea of an essential link between hysteria and the 
womb. But the link is differently conceived: it is no longer 
regarded as the trajectory of a real displacement through the 
body, but as a sort of secret propagation through the pathways of 
the organism and through functional proximities. We cannot say 
that the seat of the disease had become the brain, nor that Willis 
had made possible a psychological analysis of hysteria. But the 
brain now played the part of a relay station and the distributor of 
a disease whose origin was visceral: the womb occasioned it along 
with all the other viscera. Until the end of the eighteenth 
century, until Pinel, the uterus and the womb remained present 
in the pathology of hysteria, but as the result of a privileged 
diffusion by the humors and nerves, and not by a special prestige 
of their nature. 

Stahl justifies the parallelism of hysteria and hypochondria by 
a curious comparison of menstrual flow and hemorrhoids. He 
explains, in his analysis of spasmodic movements, that the 
hysterical affection is a violent pain, “accompanied by tension 
and compression, which makes itself principally felt below the 
hypochondriac regions.” It is called a hypochondriacal disease 
when it attacks men “in whom nature makes an effort to be rid of 
excess blood by vomiting or hemorrhoids”; it is called a hysterical 
affection when it attacks women “the course of whose periods is 
not as it should be. However, there is no essential difference 
between these two affections.” Hoffmans opinion is quite 
similar, in spite of many theoretical differences. The cause of 
hysteria is in the womb—loosening and weakening—but the seat 
of the disease is to be sought, as in the case of hypochondria, in 


155 



the stomach and the intestines; the blood and the vital humors 
begin to stagnate “in the membranous and nervous tunics of the 
intestines”; gastric disturbances result, which spread thence 
throughout the whole body. At the very center of the organism, 
the stomach serves as a relay station and diffuses the maladies 
that come from the interior and subterranean cavities of the 
body: “It is not to be doubted that the spasmodic affections 
experienced by hypochondriacs and hysterics have their seat in 
the nervous parts, and especially in the membranes of the 
stomach and the intestines, from which they are communicated 
by the intercostal nerve to the head, to the chest, to the kidneys, 
to the liver, and to all the principal organs of the body.” 

The role Hoffmann assigns to the intestines, the stomach, and 
the intercostal nerve is indicative of the manner in which the 
problem was presented in the classical period. It was not so much 
a question of escaping the old localization in the uterus, but of 
discovering the principle and the pathways of a diverse, 
polymorphous disease dispersed throughout the entire body. A 
disease was to be accounted for that could attack the head as well 
as the legs, express itself in a paralysis or in frenzied movements, 
that could bring on catalepsy or insomnia: in short, a disease that 
traversed corporeal space so rapidly and so ingeniously that it was 
virtually present throughout the entire body. 

It is futile to insist on the change of medical horizons that 
occurred from Marinello to Hoffmann. Nothing subsists of that 
famous mobility ascribed to the uterus, which had constantly 
figured in the Hippocratic tradition. Nothing, except perhaps a 
certain theme which appeared more clearly now that it was no 
longer confined to a single medical theory, but persisted 
unchanged through the succession of speculative concepts and 
explanatory schemas. This was the theme of a dynamic upheaval 
of corporeal space, of a tide of the lower powers, which, too long 
constrained and, as it were, congested, began to seethe and 
ultimately spread their disorder—with or without the brain’s 


156 



mediation—through the entire body. This theme remained 
almost stationary until the beginning of the eighteenth century, 
despite the complete reorganization of physiological concepts. 
And strangely enough, it was during the eighteenth century, 
when no theoretical or experimental innovation in pathology had 
occurred, that the theme was suddenly modified, changed 
direction—that a dynamics of corporeal space was replaced by a 
morality of sensibility. It was then, and only then, that the ideas 
of hysteria and hypochondria were to veer, and definitively enter 
the world of madness. 

We must try now to reconstitute the evolution of the theme, 
in each of its three stages: 

1. a dynamics of organic and moral penetration; 

2. a physiology of corporeal continuity; 

3. an ethic of nervous sensibility. 

If corporeal space is perceived as a solid and continuous whole, 
the disordered movement of hysteria and of hypochondria could 
result only from an element whose extreme tenuousness and 
incessant mobility permitted it to penetrate into the place 
occupied by the solids themselves. As Nathaniel Highmore put 
it, the animal spirits, “because of their igneous tenuity, can 
penetrate even the densest, the most compact bodies ..., and 
because of their activity, can penetrate the entire microcosm in a 
single instant.” The spirits, if their mobility increased, if 
penetration occurred, chaotically and in an untimely manner, in 
all the parts of the body to which they were unsuited, provoked a 
thousand diverse signs of disturbance. Hysteria, for Highmore as 
for Willis, his adversary, and for Sydenham as well, was the 
disease of a body indiscriminately penetrable to all the efforts of 
the spirits, so that the internal order of organs gave way to the 
incoherent space of masses passively subject to the chaotic 
movement of the spirits. These latter “move impetuously and in 
excessive quantity upon such or such a part, there causing spasms 


157 



or even pain ... and disturbing the function of the organs, both 
those which they abandon and those toward which they move, 
neither being able to avoid serious damage from this unequal 
distribution of spirits, which is entirely contrary to the laws of 
animal economy.” 13 The hysterical body was thus given over to 
that disorder of the spirits which, outside of all organic laws and 
any functional necessity, could successively seize upon all the 
available spaces of the body. 

The effects varied according to the regions affected, and the 
disease, undifferentiated in the pure source of its movement, 
assumed various configurations depending on the spaces it 
traversed and the surfaces where it appeared: “Having 
accumulated in the stomach, they rush in a host and with 
impetuosity upon the muscles of the larynx and the pharynx, 
producing spasms throughout the entire area they traverse, and 
causing in the stomach a swelling which resembles a large ball.” 
A little higher, the hysterical affection, “seizing upon the colon 
and upon the region which is below the heart cavity, causes there 
an insupportable pain which resembles the iliac affection.” 
Should it rise still higher, the disease attacks “the vital parts and 
causes so violent a palpitation of the heart that the sick person 
does not doubt that his attendants must be able to hear the 
sound his heart makes as it beats against his ribs.” Finally, if it 
attacks “the exterior part of the head, between the cranium and 
the pericranium, and there remains fixed in a single spot, it 
causes an extreme pain that is accompanied by violent fits of 
vomiting.” 14 Each part of the body determines in its own right 
and by its own nature the form of the symptom produced. 
Hysteria thus appears as the most real and the most deceptive of 
diseases; real because it is based upon a movement of the animal 
spirits; illusory as well, because it generates symptoms that seem 
provoked by a disorder inherent in the organs, whereas they are 
only the formation, at the level of these organs, of a central or 


158 


rather general disorder; it is the derangement of internal mobility 
that assumes the appearance, on the body’s surface, of a local 
symptom. Actually suffering from the disordered and excessive 
movement of spirits, the organ imitates its own illness; starting 
from a defect in the movement within internal space, it imitates 
a disorder that strictly belongs to itself; in this manner, hysteria 
“imitates almost all the maladies to which human flesh is subject, 
for in whatever part of the body it lodges, it immediately 
produces the symptoms that are proper to that part, and if the 
physician does not have great wisdom and experience, he will 
easily be deceived and will attribute to an illness essential and 
proper to such and such a part, symptoms that are entirely the 
result of hysterical affection”: 15 stratagems of a disease that, 
traversing corporeal space in the homogenous form of 
movement, manifests itself in specific aspects; but the type, here, 
is not essence; it is a ruse of the body. 

The more easily penetrable the internal space becomes, the 
more frequent is hysteria and the more various its aspects; but if 
the body is firm and resistant, if internal space is dense, 
organized, and solidly heterogeneous in its different regions, the 
symptoms of hysteria are rare and its effects will remain simple. 
Is this not exactly what separates female hysteria from the male 
variety, or, if you will, hysteria from hypochondria? Neither 
symptoms, in fact, nor even causes form the principle of 
separation between the diseases, but only the spatial solidarity of 
the body, and so to speak the density of the interior landscape: 
“Beyond what we may call the exterior man, who is composed of 
parts which are visible to the senses, there is an interior man 
formed of a system of animal spirits, a man who can be seen only 
with the eyes of the mind. This latter man, closely joined and so 
to speak united with the corporeal constitution, is more or less 
deranged from his state to the degree that the principles which 
form the machine have a natural firmness. That is why this 


159 


disease attacks women more than men, because they have a more 
delicate, less firm constitution, because they lead a softer life, and 
because they are accustomed to the luxuries and commodities of 
life and not to suffering.” And already, in the lines of this text, 
this spatial density yields one of its meanings: it is also a moral 
density; the resistance of the organs to the disordered penetration 
of the spirits is perhaps one and the same thing as that strength 
of soul which keeps the thoughts and the desires in order. This 
internal space which has become permeable and porous is 
perhaps only the laxity of the heart. Which explains why so few 
women are hysterical when they are accustomed to a hard and 
laborious life, yet strongly incline to become so when they lead a 
soft, idle, luxurious, and lax existence; or if some sorrow manages 
to conquer their resolution: “When women consult me about 
some complaint whose nature I cannot determine, I ask if the 
malady from which they are suffering attacks them only when 
they have some sorrow ...: if they admit as much, I am fully 
assured that their complaint is an hysterical affection.”!6 

Thus we have a new formulation of the old moral intuition 
that from the time of Hippocrates and Plato had made the 
womb a living and perpetually mobile animal, and distributed the 
spatial ordering of its movements; this intuition perceived in 
hysteria the incoercible agitation of desires in those who had 
neither the possibility of satisfying them nor the strength to 
master them; the image of the female organ rising to the breast 
and to the head gave a mythical expression to an upheaval in the 
great Platonic tripartition and in the hierarchy that was intended 
to assure its immobility. For Sydenham, for the disciples of 
Descartes, the moral intuition is identical; but the spatial 
landscape in which it is expressed has changed; Plato’s vertical 
and hieratic order is replaced by a volume which is traversed by 
incessant motion whose disorder is no longer a revolution of the 
depths to the heights but a lawless whirlwind in a chaotic space. 


160 


This “interior body” which Sydenham tried to penetrate with 
“the eyes of the mind” was not the objective body available to the 
dull gaze of a neutralized observation; it was the site where a 
certain manner of imagining the body and of deciphering its 
internal movements combined with a certain manner of investing 
it with moral values. The development is completed, the work 
done on the level of this ethical perception. In this perception the 
ever pliant images of medical theory are inflected and altered; in 
it, too, the great moral themes are formulated and gradually alter 
their initial aspect. 

This penetrable body must, however, be a continuous body. 
The dispersion of the disease through the organs is only the 
reverse of a movement of propagation which permits it to pass 
from one to another and to affect them all in succession. If the 
body of the hypochondriac or the hysteric is a porous body, 
separated from itself, distended by the invasion of disease, this 
invasion can be effected only by means of a certain spatial 
continuity. The body in which the disease circulates must have 
other properties than the body in which the sufferer s dispersed 
symptoms appear. 

The problem haunted eighteenth-century medicine, and was 
to make hypochondria and hysteria diseases of the “nervous 
type”; that is, idiopathic diseases of the general agency of all the 
sympathies. 

The nervous fiber is endowed with remarkable properties, 
which permit it to integrate the most heterogeneous elements. Is 
it not astonishing that, responsible for transmitting the most 
diverse impressions, the nerves should be of the same nature 
everywhere, and in every organ? “The nerve whose expansion at 
the back of the eye makes it possible to receive the impression of 
so subtle a matter as light; the nerve which, in the organ of 
hearing, becomes sensitive to the vibrations of sonorous bodies, 
differs no whit in nature from those which serve the grosser 


161 



sensations such as touch, taste, and odor.” This identity of 
nature, in different functions, assures the possibility of 
communication between the most distant organs, and those most 
dissimilar physiologically: “This homogeneity in the nerves of 
the animal, combined with the numerous communications that 
all maintain with each other ... establishes among the organs a 
harmony that often makes one or several parts participate in the 
affections of those which are injured.”! - But what is still more 
admirable, a nervous fiber can transmit simultaneously the 
stimulus of a voluntary movement and the impression left on the 
organ by the senses. Simon-Andre Tissot conceived this double 
function of one and the same fiber as the combination of an 
undulatory movement for voluntary stimulus (“this is the 
movement of a fluid enclosed in a malleable container, in a 
bladder, for example, that when I press it would eject liquid 
through a tube”) and a corpuscular movement for sensation (“this 
is the movement of a succession of ivory balls”). Thus sensation 
and movement can be produced at the same time in the same 
nerve: any tension and any relaxation in the fiber will alter both 
movements and sensations, as we can observe in all nervous 
diseases. 

And yet, despite all these unifying virtues of the nervous 
system, is it certain that we can explain, by the real network of its 
fibers, the cohesion of such diverse disorders as those which 
characterize hysteria or hypochondria? How conceive the liaison 
among the signs that from one part of the body to the other 
betray the presence of a nervous affection? How explain, and by 
tracing what line of connection, that in certain “delicate and 
highly sensitive” women a heady perfume or the too vivid 
description of a tragic event or even the sight of a combat 
produces such an impression that they “fall into syncopes or 
suffer convulsions”? One seeks in vain: no precise liaison of the 
nerves; no path proceeding from the original cause; but only a 


162 


remote, indirect action which is rather on the order of a 
physiological solidarity. This is because the different parts of the 
body possess a “very determined faculty, which is either general 
and extends throughout the entire system of animal economy, or 
particular and influences certain parts principally.” This very 
distinct property of both “the faculty of feeling and that of 
moving” which permits the organs to communicate with each 
other and to suffer together, to react to a stimulus, however 
distant—is sympathy. As a matter of fact, Whytt succeeded 
neither in isolating sympathy in the ensemble of the nervous 
system, nor in defining it in relation to sensibility and to 
movement Sympathy exists in the organs only insofar as it is 
received there through the intermediary of the nerves; it is the 
more marked in proportion to their mobility, and at the same 
time it is one of the forms of sensibility: “All sympathy, all 
consensus presupposes sentiment and consequently can exist only 
by the mediation of the nerves, which are the only instruments 
by which sensation operates.”!^ But the nervous system is no 
longer invoked here to explain the exact transmission of a 
movement or a sensation, but to justify, in its totality and its 
mass, the body’s sensibility with regard to its own phenomena, 
and its own echo across the volumes of its organic space. 

Diseases of the nerves are essentially disorders of sympathy; 
they presuppose a state of general vigilance in the nervous system 
which makes each organ susceptible of entering into sympathy 
with any other: “In such a state of sensibility of the nervous 
system, the passions of the soul, violations of diet, sudden 
alternation of heat and cold or of heaviness and humidity of the 
atmosphere, will very readily produce morbific symptoms; so that 
with such a constitution, one will not enjoy steady or constant 
health, but generally suffer a continual succession of more or less 
severe pains.” Doubtless this exaggerated sensibility is 
compensated by zones of insensibility, of sleep, as it were; in a 


163 


general way, hysterical sufferers are those in whom this internal 
sensibility is the most exquisite, hypochondriacs possessing it, on 
the contrary, in a relatively blunted form. And of course women 
belong to the first category: is not the womb, with the brain, the 
organ that maintains most sympathy with the whole organism? It 
suffices to cite “the vomiting that generally accompanies the 
inflammation of the womb; the nausea, the disordered appetite 
that follow conception; the constriction of the diaphragm and of 
the muscles of the abdomen during childbirth; the headache, the 
heat and the pains in the back, the intestinal colic suffered when 
the time of the menstrual flow approaches.” The entire female 
body is riddled by obscure but strangely direct paths of sympathy; 
it is always in an immediate complicity with itself, to the point of 
forming a kind of absolutely privileged site for the sympathies; 
from one extremity of its organic space to the other, it encloses a 
perpetual possibility of hysteria. The sympathetic sensibility of 
her organism, radiating through her entire body, condemns 
woman to those diseases of the nerves that are called vapors. 
“The women whose systems have generally more mobility than 
those of men are more subject to nervous diseases, which are also 
more serious in them.” 1 And Whytt assures us he has witnessed 
that “the pain of a toothache caused convulsions in a young girl 
whose nerves were weak, and an unconsciousness lasting several 
hours and returning when the pain became more acute.” 

Diseases of the nerves are diseases of corporeal continuity. A 
body too close to itself, too intimate in each of its parts, an 
organic space which is, in a sense, strangely constricted: this is 
what the theme common to hysteria and hypochondria has now 
become; the rapprochement of the body with itself assumes, for 
some, the aspect of a precise—all too precise—image: such is the 
celebrated “shriveling of the nervous system” described by 
Pomme. Such images mask the problem, but do not suppress it, 
and do not keep the enterprise from continuing. 


164 


Is this sympathy, basically, a property hidden in each organ— 
that “sentiment” which Cheyne spoke of—or a real propagation 
through an intermediary element? And is the pathological 
proximity which characterizes these nervous diseases an 
exasperation of this sentiment, or a greater mobility of this 
interstitial body? 

It is a curious but doubtless characteristic phenomenon of 
medical thought in the eighteenth century, in the period when 
physiologists tried to define most precisely the functions and the 
role of the nervous system (sensibility and irritability; sensation 
and movement), that physicians used these ideas indiscriminately 
in the undifferentiated unity of pathological perception, 
articulating them according to a schema entirely different from 
that proposed by physiology. 

Sensibility and movement are not distinguished. Tissot 
explains that the child has more sensibility than anyone else 
because in him everything is lighter and more mobile; irritability, 
in the sense in which Haller understood a property of the 
nervous fiber, is identified with irritation, understood as the 
pathological state of an organ aroused by a prolonged stimulus. It 
would thus be acknowledged that nervous diseases were states of 
irritation combined with an excessive mobility of the fibers. 

“On occasion one sees persons for whom the smallest moving 
cause occasions much more movement than it produces in 
healthy persons; they cannot sustain the slightest alien 
impression. The faintest sound, the weakest light affords them 
extraordinary symptoms.”20 By this deliberately preserved 
ambiguity in the notion of irritation, medicine at the end of the 
eighteenth century could in effect show the continuity between 
disposition (irritability) and the pathological event (irritation); 
but it could also maintain both the theme of a disorder proper to 
an organ which suffers, but in a fashion all its own, a general 
attack (it is the sensibility particular to the organ which assures 


165 


this nonetheless discontinuous communication), and the idea of 
a propagation in the organism of a single disorder that can attack 
it in each of its parts (it is the mobility of the fiber which is 
responsible for this continuity, despite the diverse forms it 
assumes in the organs). 

But if the notion of “irritated fiber” certainly plays this role of 
concerted confusion, it also permits a decisive distinction in 
pathology. On one hand, nervous sufferers are the most irritable, 
that is, have the most sensibility: tenuousness of fiber, delicacy of 
organism; but they also have an easily impressionable soul, an 
unquiet heart, too strong a sympathy for what happens around 
them. This sort of universal resonance—simultaneously 
sensation and mobility—constitutes the first determination of 
the illness. Women who have “frail fibers,” who are easily carried 
away, in their idleness, by the lively movements of their 
imagination, are more often attacked by nervous diseases than 
men who are “more robust, drier, hardened by work.” But this 
excess of irritation has this peculiarity: that in its vivacity it 
attenuates, and sometimes ends by extinguishing, the sensations 
of the soul; as if the sensibility of the nervous organ itself 
overcharged the soul’s capacity to feel, and appropriated for its 
own advantage the multiplicity of sensations aroused by its 
extreme mobility; the nervous system “is in such a state of 
irritation and reaction that it is then incapable of transmitting to 
the soul what it is experiencing; all its figures are disordered; it 
can no longer interpret them.”21 Thus appears the idea of a 
sensibility which is not sensation, and of an inverse relation 
between that delicacy which derives as much from the soul as 
from the body, and a certain numbness of the sensations that 
prevents nervous shocks from reaching the soul. The hysteric’s 
unconsciousness is only the reverse of his sensibility. It is this 
relation, which the notion of sympathy could not define, which 
was contributed by the concept of irritability, though so little 


166 



elaborated and still so confused in the thinking of pathologists. 

But by this very fact, the moral significance of “nervous 
complaints” was profoundly altered. Insofar as diseases of the 
nerves had been associated with the organic movements of the 
lower parts of the body (even by the many and confused paths of 
sympathy), they were located within a certain ethic of desire: 
they represented the revenge of a crude body; it had been as the 
result of an excessive violence that one became ill. From now on 
one fell ill from too much feeling; one suffered from an excessive 
solidarity with all the beings around one. One was no longer 
compelled by one’s secret nature; one was the victim of 
everything which, on the surface of the world, solicited the body 
and the soul. 

And as a result, one was both more innocent and more guilty. 
More innocent, because one was swept by the total irritation of 
the nervous system into an unconsciousness great in proportion 
to one’s disease. But more guilty, much more guilty, because 
everything to which one was attached in the world, the life one 
had led, the affections one had had, the passions and the 
imaginations one had cultivated too complacently—all combined 
in the irritation of the nerves, finding there both their natural 
effect and their moral punishment. All life was finally judged by 
this degree of irritation: abuse of things that were not natural, 
the sedentary life of cities, novel reading, theatergoing, 
immoderate thirst for knowledge, “too fierce a passion for the 
sex, or that other criminal habit, as morally reprehensible as it is 
physically harmful. ”22 The innocence of the nervous sufferer, 
who no longer even feels the irritation of his nerves, is at bottom 
only the just punishment of a deeper guilt: the guilt which makes 
him prefer the world to nature: “Terrible state!... This is the 
torment of all effeminate souls whom inaction has plunged into 
dangerous sensuality, and who, to rid themselves of the labors 
imposed by nature, have embraced all the phantoms of opinion. 


167 


... Thus the rich are punished for the deplorable use of their 

fortune.”23 

We stand here on the threshold of the nineteenth century, 
where the irritability of the fibers will enjoy physiological and 
pathological fortunes. What it leaves for the moment, in the 
domain of nervous diseases, is nonetheless something very 
important. 

This is, on the one hand, the complete identification of 
hysteria and hypochondria as mental diseases. By the capital 
distinction between sensibility and sensation, they enter into that 
domain of unreason which we have seen was characterized by the 
essential moment of error and dream, that is, of blindness. As 
long as vapors were convulsions or strange sympathetic 
communications through the body, even when they led to 
fainting and loss of consciousness, they were not madness. But 
once the mind becomes blind through the very excess of 
sensibility—then madness appears. 

But on the other hand, such an identification gives madness a 
new content of guilt, of moral sanction, of just punishment 
which was not at all a part of the classical experience. It burdens 
unreason with all these new values: instead of making blindness 
the condition of possibility for all the manifestations of madness, 
it describes blindness, the blindness of madness, as the 
psychological effect of a moralfault. And thereby compromises what 
had been essential in the experience of unreason. What had been 
blindness would become unconsciousness, what had been error 
would become fault, and everything in madness that designated 
the paradoxical manifestation of non-being would become the 
natural punishment of a moral evil. In short, that whole vertical 
hierarchy which constituted the structure of classical madness, 
from the cycle of material causes to the transcendence of 
delirium, would now collapse and spread over the surface of a 
domain which psychology and morality would soon occupy 


168 


together and contest with each other. 

The “scientific psychiatry” of the nineteenth century became 
possible. 

It was in these “diseases of the nerves” and in these “hysterias,” 
which would soon provoke its irony, that this psychiatry took its 
origin. 


169 



VI 



170 


DOCTORSAND 

PATIENTS 


THE therapeutics of madness did not function in the hospital, 
whose chief concern was to sever or to “correct.” And yet in the 
non-hospital domain, treatment continued to develop 
throughout the classical period: long cures for madness were 
elaborated whose aim was not so much to care for the soul as to 
cure the entire individual, his nervous fiber as well as the course 
of his imagination. The madman s body was regarded as the 
visible and solid presence of his disease: whence those physical 
cures whose meaning was borrowed from a moral perception and 
a moral therapeutics of the body. 

1. Consolidation. There exists in madness, even in its most 
agitated forms, an element of weakness. If in madness the spirits 
are subjected to irregular movements, it is because they have not 
enough strength or weight to follow the gravity of their natural 
course; if spasms and convulsions so often occur in nervous 
illnesses, it is because the fiber is too mobile, or too irritable, or 
too sensitive to vibrations; in any case, it lacks robustness. 
Beneath the apparent violence of madness, which sometimes 
seems to multiply the strength of maniacs to considerable 
proportions, there is always a secret weakness, an essential lack of 
resistance; the madman s frenzies, in fact, are only a passive 
violence. What is wanted, then, is a cure that will give the spirits 
or the fibers a vigor, but a calm vigor, a strength no disorder can 
mobilize, since from the start it will be subject to the course of 
natural law. More than the image of vivacity and vigor, it is one 
of robustness that prevails, enveloping the theme in a new 
resistance, a young elasticity, but subjugated and already 
domesticated. A force must be found within nature to reinforce 
nature itself. 


171 



The ideal remedy would “take the part” of the spirits, and 
“help them conquer the cause that ferments them.” To take the 
part of the spirits would be to struggle against the vain agitation 
to which they are subject in spite of themselves; it would also 
permit them to escape from all the chemical ebullition that heats 
and troubles them; finally it would give them enough solidity to 
resist the vapors that try to suffocate them, to make them inert, 
and to carry them off in their whirlwind. Against the vapors, the 
spirits are reinforced “by the most stinking odors”; disagreeable 
sensation vivifies the spirits, which in a sense rebel and 
vigorously flock to the place where the assault must be repelled; 
to this effect “asafetida, oil of amber, burnt leather and feathers 
will be used—that is, whatever can provide the soul with strong 
and disagreeable feelings.” Against fermentation, theriac must be 
given, “anti-epileptic spirits of Charras,” or best of all, the 
famous Queen of Hungary water; 1 acidity disappears and the 
spirits regain their true influence. Finally, to restore their true 
mobility, Lange recommends that the spirits be subjected to 
sensations and movements that are both agreeable, measured, 
and regular: “When the animal spirits are dispersed and 
disunited, remedies are necessary which calm their movement 
and return them to their natural situation, such things as give the 
soul a sweet and moderate feeling of pleasure: agreeable odors, 
walks in delightful spots, the sight of persons who are in the 
habit of providing diversion, and Music.” This firm gentleness, a 
proper gravity, ultimately a vivacity intended only to protect the 
body—all these are means to consolidate, within the organism, 
the fragile elements connecting body and soul. 

But there is probably no better fortifying procedure than the 
use of the substance which is both the most solid and the most 
docile, the most resistant but the most pliable in the hands of the 
man who knows how to forge it to his purposes: iron. Iron 
unites, in its privileged nature, all those qualities that quickly 


172 


become contradictory when they are isolated. Nothing resists 
better, nothing can better obey; it is a gift of nature, but it is also 
at the disposal of all of man s techniques. How could man help 
nature and lend it an abundance of strength by a surer means— 
that is, one closer to nature and more obedient to man—than by 
the application of iron? The old example of Dioscorides is always 
cited, who gave to the inertia of water the vigorous virtues 
foreign to it by plunging into it a bar of red-hot iron. The ardor 
of fire, the calm mobility of water, the rigor of a metal treated 
until it had become supple—all these elements, united, conferred 
upon water powers of reinforceent, of vivification, of 
consolidation, which it could transmit to the organism. But iron 
is efficacious even aside from any preparation; Sydenham 
recommends it in its simplest form, by the direct absorption of 
iron filings. Whytt instances a man who, in order to cure himself 
of a weakness of the stomach nerves involving a permanent state 
of hypochondria, took 230 grains of iron every day. This was 
because to all its virtues, iron added the remarkable property of 
transmitting itself directly, without intermediary or 
transformation. What it communicated was not its substance but 
its strength; paradoxically, though itself so resistant, it 
immediately dissolved in the organism, depositing there only its 
qualities, without rust or waste. It is evident here that an imagery 
of wonder-working iron governs discursive thought and prevails 
over observation itself. If experiments were made, it was not to 
reveal a positive sequence of effects, but to emphasize this 
immediate communication of qualities. Wright fed a dog Mars 
salts; he observed that an hour later the chyle, if mixed with 
tincture of nut gall, did not display that purple color it invariably 
assumed if the iron had been absorbed. This must have been 
because the iron, without mixing with the digestion, without 
passing into the blood, without penetrating the organism 
substantially, fortified the membranes and fibers directly. More 
than an observed effect, the consolidation of the spirits and the 


173 



nerves appears rather as an operative metaphor which implies a 
transfer of strength without any discursive dynamics. Strength is 
supplied by contact, exclusive of any exchange or substance, any 
communication of movements. 

2. Purification. Clogging of the viscera, ebullition of false 
ideas, fermentation of vapors, violence, corruption of liquids and 
spirits—madness elicits an entire series of therapeutics, each of 
which can be attached to the identical operation of purification. 

The ideal was a sort of total purification: the simplest but also 
the most impossible of cures. It would consist of substituting for 
the melancholic’s overcharged, thick blood, encumbered with 
bitter humors, a light, clear blood whose new movement would 
dissipate the delirium. In 1662 Moritz Hoffman suggested blood 
transfusion as a remedy for melancholia. Some years later, the 
idea had attained sufficient currency for the Philosophical 
Society of London to plan a series of experiments upon the 
subjects confined in Bedlam; Allen, the doctor entrusted with 
the enterprise, refused. But Jean-Baptiste Denis tried it upon one 
of his patients stricken with amorous melancholia; he drew off 
ten ounces of blood, which he replaced with a slightly smaller 
quantity taken from the femoral artery of a calf; the following 
day he began again, but this time the operation involved only a 
few ounces. The patient became calm; the following day his 
mind cleared; he was soon entirely cured; “all the professors of 
the Academy of Surgeons attested it.” The technique, however, 
was quickly abandoned, despite a few later attempts. 

The preferred medications were those that forestalled 
corruption. We know “as a result of more than three thousand 
years of experience that Myrrh and Aloes preserve corpses.”2 Are 
not these deteriorations of bodies of the same nature as those 
that accompany the diseases of the humors? Then nothing would 
be more recommendable against the vapors than products like 
myrrh or aloes, and especially the famous elixir of Paracelsus. But 


174 


more must be attempted than to forestall corruptions; they must 
be destroyed. Whence the therapeutics that attack deterioration 
itself, and seek either to deflect the corrupt substances or to 
dissolve the corrupting ones: techniques of deflection and 
techniques of detersion. 

To the first belong all the strictly physical methods that seek 
to create wounds or sores on the surface of the body, both centers 
of infection that relieve the organism, and centers of evacuation 
into the outside world. Thus Fallowes explains the beneficial 
mechanism of his oleum cephalicum ; in madness, “black vapors 
clog the very fine vessels through which the animal spirits must 
pass”; the blood is thus deprived of direction; it encumbers the 
veins of the brain where it stagnates, unless it is agitated by a 
confused movement “that distracts the ideas.” Oleum cephalicum 
has the advantage of provoking “little pustules on the head”; they 
are anointed with oil to keep them from drying out and so that 
“the black vapors lodged in the brain” may continue to escape. 
But burning and cauterizing the body at any point produces the 
same effect. It was even supposed that diseases of the skin such 
as scabies, eczema, or smallpox could put an end to a fit of 
madness; the corruption then left the viscera and the brain, to 
spread on the surface of the body, where it was released 
externally. By the end of the century, it became customary to 
inoculate scabies in the most resistant cases of mania. In his 
Instructions of 1785, addressed to the directors of hospitals, 
Francois Doublet recommends that if bleedings, purges, baths, 
and showers do not cure mania, the use of “cauters, setons, 
superficial abscesses, inoculation of scabies” will. 

But the principal task is to dissolve the fermentations which, 
having formed in the body, give rise to madness. To accomplish 
this, the chief agent is bitters. Bitterness has all the harsh virtues 
of sea water; it purifies by wearing away, it works its corrosion on 
everything useless, unhealthy, and impure that the disease may 
have deposited in the body and the soul. Bitter and active, coffee 


175 



is useful for “fat persons whose thickened humors circulate with 
difficulty”; it dries without burning—for it is the property of 
such substances to dissipate superfluous humidity without 
dangerous heat; there is in coffee, as it were, fire without flame, a 
purifying power that does not calcine; coffee reduces impurities: 
“those who take it feel by long experience that it restores the 
stomach, consumes its superfluous humidity, dissipates wind, 
dissolves the phlegm of the bowels, where it performs a mild 
abstersion, and what is most considerable, prevents the fumes 
from rising to the head and consequently reduces the aches and 
pains customarily suffered there; finally, it affords strength, vigor, 
and cleanliness to the animal spirits, without leaving any great 
impression of heat, even upon the most inured persons who are 

accustomed to use it.” Bitter, but tonic also, is the quinine 
Whytt freely prescribes to persons “whose nervous system is very 
delicate”; it is efficacious against “weakness, discouragement, and 
depression”; two years of a cure consisting only of a tincture of 
quinine, “occasionally discontinued for a month at most,” were 
sufficient to cure a woman suffering from a nervous complaint. 
For delicate persons, quinine must be associated with “a 
bitterness pleasant to the taste”; but if the organism is able to 
withstand stronger attacks, vitriol, mixed with quinine, cannot be 
too strongly recommended. Twenty or thirty drops of elixir of 
vitriol are sovereign. 

Quite naturally, soaps and soap products inevitably enjoy 
privileged effects in this purificatory enterprise. “Soap dissolves 
almost anything that is concrete.”4 Tissot believes that soap can 
be consumed directly, and that it will calm many nervous 
ailments; but more often it is sufficient to consume, first thing in 
the morning, by themselves or with bread, “soapy fruits”—that 
is, cherries, strawberries, currants, figs, oranges, grapes, ripe 
pears, and “other fruits of this nature.” But there are cases where 
the difficulty is so serious, the obstruction so irreducible, that no 


176 


soap can conquer it. Soluble tartar is then recommended. 
Muzzell was the first to have the idea of prescribing tartar for 
“madness and melancholia/’ and published several triumphant 
observations on the subject. Whytt confirms them, and shows at 
the same time that tartar functions as a detersive, since it is 
especially efficacious against obstructive illnesses: “Insofar as I 
have observed it, soluble tartar is more useful in maniac or 
melancholic affections produced by harmful humors amassed in 
the primary canals, than for those produced by a flaw in the 
brain.” Among the dissolvants, Raulin also cites honey, chimney 
soot, Oriental saffron, wood lice, powdered lobster claw, and 
bezoar. 

Halfway between these internal methods of dissolution and 
the external techniques of deflection, we find a series of practices 
of which the most frequent are applications of vinegar. As an 
acid, vinegar dissolves obstructions, destroys foreign bodies as 
they are fermenting. But in external application, it can serve as a 
revulsive, and draw harmful humors and liquids to the surface. It 
is curious but quite characteristic of the therapeutic thinking of 
this period that no contradiction was admitted between these 
two modes of action. Given what it is by nature —detersive and 
revulsive—vinegar would act in any situation according to this 
double determination, even though one of these two modes of 
action can no longer be analyzed in a rational and discursive 
fashion. It functions, then, directly, without intermediary, 
through the simple contact of two natural elements. Hence it is 
recommended to rub the head, shaved if possible, with vinegar. 
The Gazette de medecine cites the case of an empiric who 
managed to cure “a quantity of madmen by a very swift and very 
simple means. Here is his secret. After he has purged them above 
and below, he has them soak their head and hands in vinegar, 
and leaves them in this situation until they fall asleep, or rather 
until they wake up, and most of them are cured upon waking. He 
also applies to the patient’s shaved head chopped leaves of 


177 



Dipsacus, or fuller s weed.” 

3. Immersion. Here two themes intersect: the theme of 
ablution, with all that relates it to the rites of purity and rebirth; 
and the much more physiological theme of impregnation or 
immersion, which modifies the essential qualities of liquids and 
solids. Despite their different origin, and the gap between their 
levels of conceptual elaboration, they form, up to the end of the 
eighteenth century, a unity coherent enough so that their 
opposition is not experienced as such. The idea of nature, with 
its ambiguities, serves as their element of cohesion. Water, the 
simple and primitive liquid, belongs to all that is purest in 
nature; all the dubious modifications man has been able to add to 
nature’s essential kindness cannot change the beneficence of 
water; when civilization, life in society, the imaginary desires 
aroused by novel reading and theatergoing provoke nervous 
ailments, the return to water’s limpidity assumes the meaning of 
a ritual of purification; in that transparent coolness, one is reborn 
to one’s first innocence. But at the same time, the water naturally 
inherent in the composition of all bodies restores each to its own 
equilibrium; water serves as a universal physiological regulator. 
All these themes were expressed by Tissot, a disciple of 
Rousseau, whose imagination was as moral as it was medical: 
“Nature has prescribed water as the unique beverage of all 
nations; she gave it the power to dissolve all sorts of 
nourishment; it is agreeable to the palate; choose therefore a 
good cold water, fresh and light; it fortifies and cleans the 
bowels; the Greeks and Romans regarded it as a universal 
remedy.” 

The practice of immersion reaches far back into the history of 
madness; the baths taken at Epidaurus alone would bear witness 
to this; and cold applications of all kinds must have been current 
throughout antiquity, since Soranus of Ephesus, if we are to 
believe Caelius Aurelianus, already protested against their abuse. 
In the Middle Ages, the traditional treatment of a maniac was to 


178 



plunge him several times into water “until he had lost his 
strength and forgotten his fury.” Franciscus Sylvius recommends 
immersions in cases of melancholia or frenzy. And the story, 
accepted in the eighteenth century, of Van Helmonfs sudden 
discovery of the usefulness of hydrotherapy, was actually a 
reinterpretation. According to Menuret, this invention, 
supposedly dating from the middle of the seventeenth century, 
was the fortunate result of chance: a heavily chained madman 
was being transported on an open wagon; he managed, however, 
to free himself from his chains and jumped into a lake, tried to 
swim, fainted; when he was rescued, everyone thought he was 
dead, but he quickly recovered his spirits, which were abruptly 
restored to their natural order, and he “lived a long time without 
experiencing any further attack of madness.” This anecdote 
supposedly enlightened Van Helmont, who began to plunge the 
insane indiscriminately into the sea or into fresh water; “the only 
care that must be taken, is to plunge the sufferers into the water 
suddenly and unawares, and to keep them there for a long time. 
One need have no fear for their lives.” 

The truth of the story is of little importance; one thing is 
certain, which it conveys in the form of an anecdote: from the 
end of the seventeenth century, the water cure takes or regains its 
place as a major therapeutics of madness. When Doublet 
published his Instructions shortly before the Revolution, he 
prescribed, for the four major pathological forms he recognized 
(frenzy, mania, melancholia, imbecility), the regular use of baths, 
adding the use of cold showers for the first two. And at this 
period, Cheyne had already long since recommended that “all 
those who need to fortify their temperament” install baths in 
their house, and use them every two, three, or four days; or “if 
they have not the means, to bathe in some manner either in a 
lake or in running water, whenever they have occasion.” 

The advantages of water are evident, to a medicine dominated 
by the concern to equilibrate liquids and solids. For if water has 


179 



powers of impregnation, which place it first among the 
humectants, it has, insofar as it can receive supplementary 
qualities like cold and heat, the virtues of constriction, of cooling 
or of heating, and it can even have those effects of consolidation 
attributed to substances like iron. In fact, the interplay of 
qualities is very labile, in the fluid substance of water; just as it 
penetrates easily into the web of all the tissues, it may be easily 
impregnated by all the qualitative influences to which it is 
subjected. Paradoxically, its universal use in the eighteenth 
century was not the result of a general recognition of its effect 
and mode of action, but of the ease with which the most 
contradictory forms and modalities could be attributed to its 
action. It is the locus of all possible therapeutic themes, forming 
an inexhaustible reservoir of operative metaphors. In this fluid 
element occurs the universal exchange of qualities. 

Of course, cold water cools. Otherwise would it be used in 
frenzy and mania—diseases of heat, in which the spirits boil, 
solids stretch, liquids seethe to the point of evaporation, leaving 
the brains of these sufferers “dry and fragile,” as anatomy can 
daily testify? Reasonably enough, Barthelemy-Camille Boissieu 
cites cold water among the essential means of cooling cures; as a 
bath, it comes first among the “antiphlogistics” which tear from 
the body the excessive igneous particles found there; as a drink, it 
is a “procrastinative dilution” which diminishes the resistance of 
fluids to the actions of solids, and thus indirectly lowers the 
general heat of the body. 

But it can just as well be said that cold water heats and hot 
water cools. It is precisely this thesis which Darut defends. Cold 
baths attack the blood that is at the periphery of the body and 
“drive it more vigorously toward the heart.” But the heart being 
the seat of natural heat, there the blood is heated, especially 
because “the heart, which struggles alone against the other parts, 
makes new efforts to drive out the blood and to overcome the 
resistance of the capillaries. Whence a great intensity of 


180 



circulation, the division of the blood, the fluidity of the humors, 
the destruction of the encumbrances, the augmentation of the 
forces of natural heat, of the appetite of the digestive forces, of 
the activity of the body and the mind.” The paradox of the hot 
bath is symmetrical: it draws the blood to the periphery, as well 
as the humors, perspiration, and all liquids, useful or harmful. 
Thus the vital centers are relieved; the heart now must function 
slowly; and the organism is thereby cooled. Is not this fact 
confirmed by “those syncopes, those lipothymias, that weakness, 
that lack of vigor” which accompany the too constant use of hot 
baths? 

Further still: so rich is water’s polyvalence, so great its aptitude 
for submitting to the qualities it bears, that it even manages to 
lose its efficacity as a liquid, and to act as a desiccant. Water can 
conjure away humidity. It revives the old principle “like to like,” 
but in another sense, and by the intermediary of an entire visible 
mechanism. For some, it is cold water that dries, heat on the 
contrary preserving water’s humidity. Heat, in fact, dilates the 
pores of the organism, distends its membranes, and permits 
humidity to impregnate them by a secondary effect. Heat clears 
the way for liquids. It is precisely for this reason that all the hot 
drinks the seventeenth century used and abused risk becoming 
harmful: relaxation, general humidity, softness of the entire 
organism—this is what threatens those who consume too many 
such infusions. And since these are the distinctive traits of the 
female body, as opposed to virile dryness and solidity, the abuse 
of hot drinks risks leading to a general feminization of the 
human race: “Most men are censured, not without reason, for 
having degenerated in contracting the softness, the habits, and 
the inclinations of women; there is lacking only a resemblance in 
bodily constitution. Excessive use of humectants immediately 
accelerates the metamorphosis and makes the two sexes almost as 
alike in the physical as in the moral realm. Woe to the human 
race, if this prejudice extends its reign to the common people; 


181 



there will be no more plowmen, artisans, soldiers, for they will 
soon be robbed of the strength and vigor necessary to their 
profession.” In cold water, it is the cold that vanquishes all the 
powers of humidity, for by tightening the tissues, it closes them 
to all possibility of impregnation: “Do we not see how much the 
vessels, the tissues of our flesh tighten when we wash in cold 
water or when we are numbed with cold?”6 Cold baths thus have 
the paradoxical property of consolidating the organism, of 
guaranteeing it against the softness of humidity, of “giving tone 
to the parts,” as Hoffmann said, “and augmenting the systaltic 
power of the heart and the vessels.” 

But in other qualitative intuitions, the relationship is reversed; 
here it is heat that dries up water s humectant properties, while 
cold ceaselessly preserves and renews them. Against diseases of 
the nerves due to “a shriveling of the nervous system” and “the 
dryness of the membranes,” Pomme does not recommend hot 
baths—which abet the heat that reigns in the body—but tepid or 
cold baths that can permeate the tissues of the organism and 
restore their suppleness. Is this not the method spontaneously 
practiced in America? And are not its effects, its very mechanism 
visible to the naked eye in the development of the cure, since at 
the most acute point of the crisis, the sufferers float in the water 
of the bath—to such an extent has internal heat rarified the air 
and the liquids of their bodies; yet if they remain a long time in 
the bath water, “three, four, or even six hours a day,” then 
relaxation takes place, the water gradually impregnates the 
membranes and the fibers, the body becomes heavy and sinks 
naturally to the bottom. 

At the end of the eighteenth century, the powers of water 
wane in the very excess of its qualitative versatility: cold, it can 
heat; hot, it can cool; instead of humidifying, it is even capable of 
solidifying, of petrifying by cold, or of sustaining a fire with its 
own heat. In it, all the values of beneficence and maleficence 


182 


indiscriminately combine. It is endowed with all possible 
complicities. In medical thought, it forms a therapeutic theme 
which can be used and manipulated unconditionally, and whose 
effect can be understood in the most diverse physiologies and 
pathologies. It has so many values, so many different modes of 
action, that it can confirm anything, cancel anything. No doubt 
it was this very polyvalence, with all the disputes it generated, 
that finally neutralized water. By Pinefs day, water was still used, 
but it had again become entirely limpid, its qualitative overtones 
had been eliminated, and its mode of action could no longer be 
anything but mechanical. 

Showers, hitherto less used than baths and drinks, now 
become the favored technique. And paradoxically, water regains, 
beyond all the physiological variations of the preceding epoch, its 
simple function of purification. The only quality attributed to it 
is violence, an irresistible flow washing away all the impurities 
that form madness; by its own curative power, it reduces the 
individual to his simplest possible expression, to his merest and 
purest form of existence, thus affording him a second birth; it is a 
matter, Pinel explains, “of destroying even the smallest traces of 
the extravagant ideas of the insane, which can be done only by 
obliterating, so to speak, these ideas in a state close to that of 
death.” Whence the famous techniques used in asylums like 
Charenton at the end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the 
nineteenth century: the shower proper—“the insane man, 
fastened to an armchair, was placed beneath a reservoir filled 
with cold water which poured directly upon his head through a 
large pipe”; and surprise baths—“the sufferer came down the 
corridors to the ground floor, and arrived in a square vaulted 
room, in which a pool had been constructed; he was pushed over 

backwards and into the water.”? Such violence promised the 
rebirth of a baptism. 

4. Regulation of Movement. If it is true that madness is the 


183 


irregular agitation of the spirits, the disordered movement of 
fibers and ideas, it is also obstruction of the body and the soul, 
stagnation of the humors, immobilization of the fibers in their 
rigidity, fixation of ideas and attention on a theme that gradually 
prevails over all others. It is then a matter of restoring to the 
mind and to the spirits, to the body and to the soul, the mobility 
which gives them life. This mobility, however, must be measured 
and controlled; it must not become a vain agitation of the fibers 
which no longer obey the stimuli of the exterior world. The 
animating idea of this therapeutic theme is the restitution of a 
movement that corresponds to the prudent mobility of the 
exterior world. Since madness can be dumb immobility, 
obstinate fixation as well as disorder and agitation, the cure 
consists in reviving in the sufferer a movement that will be both 
regular and real, in the sense that it will obey the rules of the 
world’s movements. 

Physicians of the period evoke the firm belief of the ancients, 
who attributed salutary effects to various forms of walking and 
running: simple walking, which both limbers and strengthens the 
body; running at an ever increasing speed, which better 
distributes the juices and humors throughout the body, at the 
same time that it diminishes the weight of the organs; running 
fully dressed, which heats and loosens the tissues, softens too 
rigid fibers. Sydenham especially recommends horseback riding 
in cases of melancholia and hypochondria: “But the best thing I 
have yet found to fortify and animate the blood and the spirits, is 
to ride almost every day, and in this manner to make rather long 
excursions in the fresh air. This exercise, by the extraordinary 
jolting it causes the lungs and especially the viscera of the lower 
stomach, rids the blood of the excremental humors that reside 
there, gives resilience to the fibers, re-establishes the functions of 
the organs, reanimates natural heat, evacuates degenerate juices 
by perspiration or other means, or else re-establishes them in 
their previous state, dissipates obstructions, opens all passages, 


184 



and finally, through the continual movement it causes the blood, 
renews it, so to speak, and accords it an extraordinary vigor.”8 
The rolling of the sea, the most regular, the most natural 
movement in the world, and the one most in accord with cosmic 
order—that same movement which De Lancre once considered 
so dangerous for the human heart, offering as it did so many 
hazardous temptations, improbable and always unfulfilled 
dreams, constitutive of the image, in fact, of infinite evil—was 
considered by the eighteenth century as a powerful regulator of 
organic mobility. In it, the very rhythm of nature spoke. 
Gilchrist wrote an entire treatise “on the use of sea voyages in 
Medicine”; Whytt found the remedy difficult to apply to those 
subject to melancholia; it is “difficult to convince such patients to 
undertake a long sea voyage; but a case must be cited of 
hypochondriacal vapors that immediately disappeared in a young 
man who was constrained to travel in a ship for four or five 
weeks.” 

Travel has the additional interest of acting directly upon the 
flow of ideas, or at least by a more direct means, since it passes 
only through the sensations. The variety of the landscape 
dissipates the melancholic’s obstinacy: a remedy in use since 
antiquity, but which the eighteenth century prescribed with a 
new insistence, and whose forms it varied, from real travel to the 
imaginary voyages of literature and the theater. Antoine le 
Camus prescribes “in order to relax the brain” in all cases of 
vaporous affections: “walks, journeys, rides, exercise in the fresh 
air, dancing, spectacles, diverting reading, occupations that can 
cause the obsessive idea to be forgotten.” The country, by the 
gentleness and variety of its landscapes, wins melancholics from 
their single obsession “by taking them away from the places that 
might revive the memory of their sufferings.” 

But inversely, the agitation of mania can be corrected by the 
good effects of a regular movement. This is no longer a restoring 


185 


of motion but a regulation of agitation, momentarily stopping its 
course, fixing the attention. Travel is efficacious not by its 
incessant breaks in continuity, but by the novelty of the objects it 
affords, by the curiosity to which it gives birth. It should permit 
the external distraction of a mind which has escaped all control, 
and has escaped from itself in the vibration of its interior 
movement. “If one can discover objects or persons who may be 
able to distract the attention from the pursuit of deranged ideas 
and who may be able to fix it somewhat upon others, they must 
be presented often to maniacs; and it is for this reason that 
advantages may often be obtained from travel, which interrupts 
the sequence of former ideas and offers objects that fix the 

attention.”^ 

Utilized for the changes it affords in melancholia, or for the 
regularity it imposes upon mania, the therapeutics of movement 
conceals the idea of a seizure by the world of the alienated mind. 
It is both a “falling in step” and a conversion, since movement 
prescribes its rhythm, but constitutes, by its novelty or variety, a 
constant appeal to the mind to leave itself and return to the 
world. If it is true that the techniques of immersion always 
concealed the ethical, almost religious memories of ablution, of a 
second birth, in these cures by movement we can also recognize a 
symmetrical moral theme, but one that is the converse of the 
first: to return to the world, to entrust oneself to its wisdom by 
returning to one’s place in the general order of things, thus 
forgetting madness, which is the moment of pure subjectivity. 
We see how even in empiricism, the means of cure encounter the 
great organizing structures of the experience of madness in the 
classical period. Being both error and sin, madness is 
simultaneously impurity and solitude; it is withdrawn from the 
world, and from truth; but it is by that very fact imprisoned in 
evil. Its double nothingness is to be the visible form of that non- 
being which is evil, and to utter, in the void and in the 


186 


sensational appearances of its delirium, the non-being of error. It 
is totally pure , since it is nothing if not the evanescent point of a 
subjectivity from which all presence of the truth has been 
removed; and totally impure , since this nothingness is the non- 
being of evil. The technique of cure, down to its physical 
symbols most highly charged with iconographic intensity— 
consolidation and return to movement on the one hand, 
purification and immersion on the other—is secretly organized 
around these two fundamental themes: the subject must be 
restored to his initial purity, and must be wrested from his pure 
subjectivity in order to be initiated into the world; the non-being 
that alienates him from himself must be annihilated, and he 
must be restored to the plenitude of the exterior world, to the 
solid truth of being. 

The techniques were to subsist longer than their meaning. 
When, outside the experience of unreason, madness had received 
a purely psychological and moral status, when the relations of 
error and fault by which classicism defined madness were 
crammed into the single notion of guilt, the techniques still 
remained, but with a much more restricted significance; all that 
was sought was a mechanical effect, or a moral punishment. It 
was in this manner that the methods of regulating movement 
degenerated into the famous “rotatory machine” whose 
mechanism and efficacity were demonstrated by Mason Cox at 
the beginning of the nineteenth century: 10 a perpendicular pillar 
is attached to both floor and ceiling; the sufferer is attached to a 
chair or a bed hung from a horizontal arm moving around the 
pillar; by means of a “not very complicated system of gears” the 
machine is set for “the degree of speed desired.” Cox cites one of 
his own observations; it concerns a man whom melancholia had 
thrown into a kind of stupor: “His complexion was dark and 
leaden, his eyes yellow, his looks constantly fixed upon the 
ground, his limbs motionless, his tongue dry and paralyzed, and 


187 


his pulse slow.” This sufferer was placed upon the rotatory 
machine, which was set at an increasingly rapid movement. The 
effect surpassed expectation; the sufferer became excessively 
disturbed: melancholic rigidity gave way to manic agitation. But 
this first effect passed, and the invalid relapsed into his initial 
state. The rhythm was then changed; the machine was made to 
turn very rapidly, but it was stopped at regular intervals, and in a 
very abrupt manner. The melancholia was driven out, without 
the rotation having had time to release the manic agitation. This 
“centrifugation” of melancholia is very characteristic of the new 
use of the old therapeutic themes. Movement no longer aimed at 
restoring the invalid to the truth of the exterior world, but only 
at producing a series of internal effects, purely mechanical and 
purely psychological. It was no longer the presence of the truth 
that determined the cure, but a functional norm. In this 
reinterpretation of the old method, the organism was no longer 
related to anything but itself and its own nature, while in the 
initial version, what was to be restored was its relation with the 
world, its essential link with being and with truth: if we add that 
the rotatory machine was soon used as a threat and a 
punishment, we see the impoverishment of the meanings which 
had richly sustained the therapeutic methods throughout the 
entire classical period. Medicine was now content to regulate and 
to punish, with means which had once served to exorcise sin, to 
dissipate error in the restoration of madness to the world’s 
obvious truth. 

In 1771, Bienville wrote apropos of Nymphomania that there 
were times when it could be cured “merely by treating the 
imagination; but there were none or almost none when physical 
remedies alone could effect a radical cure.” And a little later, 
Beauchesne: “One would undertake in vain to cure a man 
suffering from madness, if one tried to succeed by physical means 
alone.... Material remedies can never enjoy a complete success 


188 



without that succor which a strong and healthy mind affords a 
weak and sick one.” 

Such texts do not discover the necessity of a psychological 
treatment; rather they mark the end of an era: the era when the 
difference between physical medicaments and moral treatments 
was not yet accepted as obvious by medical thought. The unity of 
the symbols begins to break down, and the techniques lose their 
total significance. They are no longer credited with more than a 
local efficacity—on the body or on the soul. The cure again 
changes direction; it is no longer determined by the meaningful 
unity of the disease, organized around its major qualities; but, 
segment by segment, must address itself to the various elements 
that compose the disease; the cure will consist of a series of 
partial destructions, in which psychological attack and physical 
intervention are juxtaposed, complement each other, but never 
interpenetrate. 

In fact, what to us seems already the outline of a psychological 
cure was no such thing to the classical physicians who applied it. 
Since the Renaissance, music had regained all those therapeutic 
virtues antiquity had attributed to it. Its effects were especially 
remarkable upon madness. Johann Schenck cured a man “fallen 
into a profound melancholia” by having him attend “concerts of 
musical instruments that particularly pleased him”; Wilhelm 
Albrecht also cured a delirious patient, after having tried all other 
remedies in vain, by prescribing the performance, during one of 
his attacks, of “a little song which awakened the sufferer, pleased 
him, excited him to laugh, and dispelled the paroxysm forever.” 
Even cases of frenzy were cited as having been cured by music. 
Now, such observations were never meant to suggest 
psychological interpretations. If music cured, it was by acting 
upon the entire human being, by penetrating the body as 
directly, as efficaciously as it did the soul: did not Diemerbroek 
know of people stricken with the plague who had been cured by 
music? Doubtless most people no longer believed, as 


189 



Giambattista della Porta still did, that music, in the material 
reality of its sounds, afforded the body the secret virtues hidden 
in the very substance of the instruments; no longer believed, as 
he did, that lymphatics were cured by “a lively air played on a 
holly flute,” or that melancholics were soothed by “a soft air 
played on a hellebore flute,” or that it was necessary to use “a 
flute made of larkspur or iris stems to cure impotent and frigid 
men.” But if music no longer transmitted the virtues sealed in 
substances, it was efficacious upon the body because of the 
qualities it imposed upon it. It even constituted the most 
rigorous of all the mechanisms of quality, since at its origin it 
was nothing but movement, whereas once it had reached the ear 
it immediately became qualitative effect. Music’s therapeutic 
value occurred because this transformation was undone in the 
body, quality there re-decomposed into movements, the pleasure 
of sensation became what it had always been: regular vibrations 
and equilibrium of tensions. Man, as unity of soul and body, 
followed the cycle of harmony in a reverse direction, 
redescending from the harmonious to the harmonic. In him, 
music was decomposed, but health restored. But there was 
another avenue, still more direct and more efficacious: by taking 
it, man no longer played the negative role of anti-instrument; he 
reacted as if he himself were the instrument: “If one were to 
consider the human body as merely an assemblage of more or 
less taut fibers, ignoring their sensibility, their life, their 
movement, one would easily conceive that music must produce 
the same effect on the fibers as it does on the strings of similar 
instruments;”! 1 an effect of resonance which has no need to 
follow the long and complex paths of auditory sensation. The 
nervous system vibrates with the music that fills the air; the 
fibers are like so many “deaf dancers” whose movement keeps 
time to a music they do not hear. And this time, it is within the 
body itself, from the nervous fiber to the soul, that the music is 


190 


recomposed, the harmonic structure of consonance restoring the 
harmonious functioning of the passions. 

The very use of passion in the therapeutics of madness must 
not be understood as a form of psychological medication. To 
employ passion against dementia is merely to attack the unity of 
soul and body at its most rigorous point, to utilize an event in the 
double system of its effects, and in the immediate 
correspondence of their meaning. To cure madness by passion 
implies that one accepts the reciprocal symbolism of soul and 
body. Fear, in the eighteenth century, was regarded as one of the 
passions most advisable to arouse in madmen. It was considered 
the natural complement of the constraints imposed upon 
maniacs and lunatics; a sort of discipline was even imagined 
which would immediately accompany and compensate every 
attack of anger in a maniac by a reaction of fear: “It is by force 
that the furies of a maniac are overcome; it is by opposing fear to 
anger that anger may be mastered. If the terror of punishment 
and public shame are associated in the mind during attacks of 
anger, one will not appear without the other; the poison and the 
antidote are inseparable.”12 But fear is efficacious not only at the 
level of the effects of the disease; it is the disease itself that fear 
attacks and suppresses. It has, in fact, the property of petrifying 
the operations of the nervous system, somehow congealing its 
too mobile fibers, controlling all their disordered movements; 
“fear being a passion that diminishes the excitation of the brain, 
it can consequently calm its excesses, and especially the irascible 
excitation of maniacs.”!3 

If the fear-anger antithesis is efficacious against manic 
irritation, it can be used inversely against the unmotivated fears 
of melancholics, hypochondriacs, and all those who have a 
lymphatic temperament. Tissot, reviving the traditional idea that 
anger is a discharge of bile, considers that it is useful for 
dissolving the phlegms amassed in the stomach and in the blood. 


191 


By subjecting the nervous fibers to a stronger tension, anger gives 
them more vigor, thus restoring their lost elasticity and 
permitting fear to disappear. The cure by passion is based on a 
constant metaphor of qualities and movements; it always implies 
that they are immediately transferable in their own modality 
from the body to the soul, and vice versa. It must be used, says 
Scheidenmantel in the treatise he devotes to this form of cure, 
“when the cure necessitates in the body changes identical to 
those which this passion produces/’ And it is in this sense that it 
can be the universal substitute for all other physical therapeutics; 
it is only another way to produce the same sequence of effects. 
Between a cure by the passions and a cure by the prescriptions of 
the pharmacopoeia, there is no difference in nature; but only a 
diversity in the mode of access to those mechanisms which are 
common to the body and to the soul. “The passions must be 
utilized, if the sufferer cannot be led by reason to do what is 
necessary for the restoration of his health.” 

It is thus not possible to use as a valid or at least meaningful 
distinction for the classical period the difference—immediately 
apparent to us—between physical medications and psychological 
or moral medications. The difference only begins to exist in all 
its profundity the day when fear is no longer used as a method 
for arresting movement, but as a punishment; when joy does not 
signify organic expansion, but reward; when anger is nothing 
more than a response to concerted humiliation; in short, when 
the nineteenth century, by inventing its famous “moral 
methods,” has brought madness and its cure into the domain of 
guilt. The distinction between the physical and the moral 
becomes a practical concept in the medicine of the mind only 
when the problematics of madness shifts to an interrogation of 
the subject responsible. The purely moral space, which is then 
defined, gives the exact measurements of that psychological 
inwardness where modern man seeks both his depth and his 
truth. Physical therapeutics tends to become, in the first half of 


192 



the nineteenth century, a cure devised by an innocent 
determinism, and moral treatment a cure wrought by a culpable 
freedom. Psychology, as a means of curing, is henceforth 
organized around punishment. Before seeking to relieve, it 
inflicts suffering within the rigor of a moral necessity. “Do not 
employ consolations, they are useless; have no recourse to 
reasoning, it does not persuade; do not be sad with melancholics, 
your sadness sustains theirs; do not assume an air of gaiety with 
them, they are only hurt by it. What is required is great sang¬ 
froid, and when necessary, severity. Let your reason be their rule 
of conduct. A single string still vibrates in them, that of pain; 
have courage enough to pluck it. ”14 

The heterogeneity of the physical and the moral in medical 
thought is not a result of Descartes’s definition of substances; a 
century and a half of post-Cartesian medicine did not succeed in 
assimilating that separation on the level of problems and 
methods, nor in understanding the distinction of substances as 
an opposition of organic to psychological. Cartesian or anti- 
Cartesian, classical medicine never introduced Descartes’s 
metaphysical dualism into anthropology. And when the 
separation did occur, it was not by a renewed loyalty to the 
Meditations , but by a new privilege accorded to transgression. 
Only the use of punishment distinguished, in treating the mad, 
the medications of the body from those of the soul. A purely 
psychological medicine was made possible only when madness 
was alienated in guilt. 

Of this, however, a whole aspect of medical practice during 
the classical period might stand as a long denial. The 
psychological element, in its purity, seems to have its place 
among the techniques. How else explain the importance attached 
to exhortation, to persuasion, to reasoning, to that whole 
dialogue in which the classical physician engages with his 
patient, independently of the cure by bodily remedies? How 


193 


explain that Sauvages can write, in agreement with all his 
contemporaries: “One must be a philosopher to be able to cure 
the diseases of the soul. For as the origin of these diseases is 
nothing more than a violent desire for a thing which the sufferer 
envisages as a good, it is part of the physician’s duty to prove to 
him by solid reasons that what he desires so ardently is an 
apparent good but a real evil, in order to make him renounce his 
error.” 

In fact this approach to madness is neither more nor less 
psychological than any of those we have already discussed. 
Language, the formulations of truth or morality, are in direct 
contact with the body; and it is Bienville again, in his treatise on 
Nymphomania , who shows how the adoption or the rejection of 
an ethical principle can directly modify the course of organic 
processes. However, there is a difference in nature between those 
techniques which consist in modifying the qualities common to 
body and soul, and those which consist in treating madness by 
discourse. In the first case, the technique is one of metaphors, at 
the level of a disease that is a deterioration of nature; in the 
second, the technique is one of language, at the level of a 
madness perceived as reason s debate with itself. The technique, 
in this last form, functions in a domain where madness is 
“treated”—in all the senses of the word—in terms of truth and 
error. In short, there always existed, throughout the classical 
period, a juxtaposition of two technical universes in the 
therapeutics of madness. One, which is based on an implicit 
mechanics of qualities, and which addresses madness as 
essentially passion —that is, a certain compound (movement- 
quality) belonging to both body and soul; the other, which is 
based on the discursive movement of reason reasoning with 
itself, and which addresses madness as error, as double inanity of 
language and image, as delirium. The structural cycle of passion 
and of delirium which constitutes the classical experience of 
madness reappears here in the world of techniques—but in a 


194 



syncopated form. Its unity is expressed only distantly. What is 
immediately visible, in capital letters, is the duality, almost the 
opposition, in the medicine of madness, of the methods of 
suppressing the disease, and of the forms of treating unreason. 
These latter can be reduced to three essential configurations. 

1. Awakening. Since delirium is the dream of waking persons, 
those who are delirious must be torn from this quasi-sleep, 
recalled from their waking dream and its images to an authentic 
awakening, where the dream disappears before the images of 
perception. Descartes sought this absolute awakening, which 
dismisses one by one all the forms of illusion, at the beginning of 
his Meditations , and found it, paradoxically, in the very awareness 
of the dream, in the consciousness of deluded consciousness. But 
in madmen, it is medicine which must effect the awakening, 
transforming the solitude of Cartesian courage into an 
authoritarian intervention, by the man awake and certain of his 
wakefulness, into the illusion of the man who sleeps waking: a 
short cut that dogmatically reduces Descartes’s long road. What 
Descartes discovers at the end of his resolution and in the 
doubling of a consciousness that never separates from itself and 
does not split, medicine imposes from outside, and in the 
dissociation of doctor and patient. The physician, in relation to 
the madman, reproduces the moment of the Cogito in relation 
to the time of the dream, of illusion, and of madness. A 
completely exterior Cogito, alien to cogitation itself, and which 
can be imposed upon it only in the form of an invasion. 

This structure of invasion by wakefulness is one of the most 
constant forms among the therapeutics of madness. It often 
assumes the simplest aspects, simultaneously those most highly 
charged with images and those most credited with immediate 
powers. It is asserted that a gun discharged near her cured a 
young girl of convulsions contracted as the result of severe grief. 
Without going so far as this iconographic representation of the 
methods of awakening, sudden and strong emotions achieve the 


195 



same result. It is in this spirit that Boerhaave performed his 
famous cure of convulsives at Haarlem. In the city hospital, an 
epidemic of convulsions had broken out. Antispasmodics, 
administered in strong doses, did no good. Boerhaave ordered 
“that stoves filled with burning coals be brought, and that iron 
hooks of a certain form be heated in them; thereupon, he said in 
a loud voice that since all the means hitherto employed in 
attempting to cure the convulsions had been useless, he knew of 
only one other remedy, which was to burn to the bone, with red- 
hot irons, a certain spot on the arm of any person, male or 
female, who suffered an attack of a convulsive illness.”15 

Slower, but also more certain of the truth it confronts, is the 
awakening that proceeds from wisdom itself and from its 
insistent, imperative progress through the landscapes of madness. 
From this wisdom, in its various forms, Willis sought the cure of 
the various madnesses. For imbeciles, a pedagogical wisdom; an 
“attentive and devoted master must educate them completely”; 
they must be taught, little by little and very slowly, what children 
are taught in school. For melancholics, a wisdom that takes as its 
model the most rigorous and most evident forms of truth: what 
is imaginary in their delirium will disappear in the light of an 
incontestable truth; this is why “mathematical and chemical” 
studies are strongly recommended. For the others, the wisdom of 
a well-ordered life will reduce their delirium; there is no need to 
impose upon them any other truth than that of their everyday 
life; remaining in their homes, “they must continue to manage 
their affairs, direct their families, order and cultivate their estates, 
their gardens, their orchards, their fields.” It is, on the contrary, 
the exactitude of a social order, imposed from without and, if 
necessary, by force, that can gradually restore the minds of 
maniacs to the light of truth: “For this, the insane person, placed 
in a special house, will be treated, either by the doctor or by 
trained assistants, in such a way that he may be always 


196 


maintained in his duty, in his appearance and habits, by 
warnings, by remonstrances, and by punishments immediately 

inflicted.” 16 

Little by little during the classical period, this authoritarian 
awakening of madness would lose its original meaning and limit 
itself to being no more than recollection of moral law, return to 
the good, fidelity to the law. What Willis still intended as a 
reintroduction to truth would no longer be entirely understood 
by Sauvages, who speaks of lucidity in the recognition of the 
good: “Thus, one can recall to reason those whom false principles 
of moral philosophy have caused to lose their own, as long as 
they are willing to examine with us what is truly good, and what 
things are to be preferred to others.” Already it is no longer as 
awakener that the physician is to function, but as moralist. 
Against madness, Tissot considers that “a pure conscience, 
without reproach, is an excellent preservative.” And soon comes 
Pinel, for whom the awakening to truth no longer has a meaning 
in the cure, but only obedience and blind submission: “A 
fundamental principle for the cure of mania in a great number of 
cases is to resort first of all to an energetic repression, and to 
proceed subsequently to methods of benevolence.” 

2. Theatrical Representation. In appearance at least, this is a 
technique rigorously opposed to that of awakening. There, 
delirium, in all its immediate vivacity, was confronted by the 
patient work of reason. Either in the form of a slow pedagogy, or 
the form of an authoritarian invasion, reason was imposed, as if 
by the weight of its own being. The non-being of madness, the 
inanity of error, was forced to yield, finally, to this pressure of the 
truth. Here, the therapeutic operation functions entirely in the 
space of the imagination; we are dealing with a complicity of the 
unreal with itself; the imagination must play its own game, 
voluntarily propose new images, espouse delirium for delirium’s 
sake, and without opposition or confrontation, without even a 


197 


visible dialectic, must, paradoxically, cure. Health must lay siege 
to madness and conquer it in the very nothingness in which the 
disease is imprisoned. When the imagination “is sick, it can be 
cured only by the effect of a healthy and active imagination.... It 
is all one whether the invalid’s imagination is cured by fear, by a 
strong and painful impression upon the senses, or by an 
illusion.”! Illusion can cure the illusory—while reason alone can 
free from the unreasonable. What then is this dark power of the 
imaginary? 

Insofar as it is of the essence of the image to be taken for 
reality, it is reciprocally characteristic of reality that it can mime 
the image, pretend to the same substance, the same significance. 
Without a break, without a jolt, perception can continue the 
dream, fill in its gaps, confirm what is precarious about it, and 
lead it to its fulfillment. If illusion can appear as true as 
perception, perception in its turn can become the visible, 
unchallengeable truth of illusion. Such is the first step of the cure 
by “theatrical representation”: to integrate the unreality of the 
image into perceived truth, without the latter seeming to 
contradict or even contest the former. Thus Zacatus Lusitanus 
describes the cure of a melancholic who believed himself damned 
while still on earth because of the enormity of the sins he had 
committed. In the impossibility of convincing him by reasonable 
arguments that he could be saved, his physicians accepted his 
delirium and caused an “angel” dressed in white, with a sword in 
its hand, to appear to him, and after a severe exhortation this 
delusive vision announced that his sins had been remitted. 

From this very example, we see the next step: representation 
within the image is not enough; it is also necessary to continue the 
delirious discourse. For in the patient’s insane words there is a 
voice that speaks; it obeys its own grammar, it articulates a 
meaning. Grammar and meaning must be maintained in such a 
way that the representation of the hallucination in reality does 


198 


not seem like the transition from one register to another, like a 
translation into a new language, with an altered meaning. The 
same language must continue to make itself understood, merely 
bringing a new deductive element to the rigor of its discourse. 
Yet this element is not indifferent; the problem is not to pursue 
the delirium, but by continuing it to bring it to an end. It must 
be led to a state of paroxysm and crisis in which, without any 
addition of a foreign element, it is confronted by itself and forced 
to argue against the demands of its own truth. The real and 
perceptual discourse that prolongs the delirious language of the 
images must therefore, without escaping the latter’s laws, 
without departing from its sovereignty, exercise a positive 
function in relation to it; it tightens that language around its 
essential element; if it represents it at the risk of confirming it, it 
is in order to dramatize it. The case is cited of a sufferer who 
thought that he was dead, and was really dying from not eating; 
“a group of people who had made themselves pale and were 
dressed like the dead, entered his room, set up a table, brought 
food, and began to eat and drink before the bed. The starving 
‘dead man’ looked at them; they were astonished that he stayed 
in bed; they persuaded him that dead people eat at least as much 
as living ones. He readily accommodated himself to this idea.”18 
It is within a continuous discourse that the elements of delirium, 
coming into contradiction, bring on the crisis. A crisis which is, 
in a very ambiguous manner, both medical and theatrical; a 
whole tradition of Western medicine dating from Hippocrates 
here intersects, suddenly and for only a few years, with one of the 
major forms of theatrical experience. Before us appears the great 
theme of a crisis that confronts the madman with his own 
meaning, reason with unreason, man’s lucid ruse with the 
blindness of the lunatic—a crisis which marks the point at which 
illusion, turned back upon itself, will open to the dazzlement of 
truth. 


199 


This opening is imminent in the crisis; in fact it is this 
opening, with its immediate proximity, that constitutes the 
essential element of the crisis. But the opening does not result 
from the crisis itself In order for the crisis to be medical and not 
simply dramatic, in order for it to be not an annihilation of the 
man, but simply a suppression of the disease; in short, in order 
for the dramatic representation of the delirium to have an effect 
of comic purification, a ruse must be introduced at a given 
moment. A ruse, or at least an element which surreptitiously 
alters the autonomous operation of the delirium, and which, 
ceaselessly confirming it, does not bind it to its own truth 
without at the same time linking it to the necessity for its own 
suppression. The simplest example of this method is the ruse 
employed with delirious patients who imagine they perceive 
within their bodies an object or an extraordinary animal: “When 
an invalid believes that he has a living animal shut up within his 
body, one must pretend to have withdrawn it; if it is in the 
stomach, one may, by means of a powerful purge, produce this 
effect, throwing such an animal into the basin without the 
patient’s noticing.”19 The theatrical device represents the object 
of the delirium but cannot do so without externalizing it, and if 
it gives the invalid a perceptual confirmation of his illusion, it 
does so only while ridding him of it by force. The artificial 
reconstitution of delirium constitutes the real distance in which 
the sufferer recovers his liberty. 

But sometimes, there is even no need of this “distancing.” It is 
within the quasi-perception of the delirium that there is 
established, by means of a ruse, a perceptual element, silent at 
first, but whose gradual affirmation will come to contest the 
entire system. It is in himself and in the perception which 
confirms his delirium that the sufferer perceives the liberating 
reality. Trallion reports how a physician dissipated the delirium 
of a melancholic who imagined he had no head, but only a kind 


200 


of void in its place; the physician, entering into the delirium, 
agreed at the sufferer’s request to fill up this space, and placed 
upon his head a great ball of lead. Soon the discomfort that 
resulted from the painful weight convinced the invalid that he 
had a head. Ultimately the ruse and its function of comic 
reduction can be assured, with the complicity of the physician 
but without any other direct intervention on his part, by the 
spontaneous reaction of the sufferer’s organism. In the case cited 
above of the melancholic who was really dying because he would 
not eat, believing himself already dead, the theatrical 
representation of a dead men’s banquet incited him to eat; this 
nourishment restored him, “the consumption of food made him 
quieter,” and the organic disorder thus disappearing, the delirium 
which was indissociably cause and effect disappeared forthwith. 
Thus the real death that would have resulted from the imaginary 
death was avoided by reality, by the mere representation of 
unreal death. The exchange of non-being with itself is carried 
out in this ingenious play: the non-being of delirium is turned 
against the being of the illness, and suppresses it by the simple 
fact that it is driven out of the delirium by dramatic 
representation. The fulfillment of delirium’s non-being in being 
is able to suppress it as non-being itself; and this by the pure 
mechanism of its internal contradiction—a mechanism that is 
both a play on words and a play of illusion, games of language 
and of the image; the delirium, in effect, is suppressed as non- 
being since it becomes a perceived form of being; but since the 
being of delirium is entirely in its non-being, it is suppressed as 
delirium. And its confirmation in theatrical fantasy restores it to 
a truth which, by holding it captive in reality, drives it out of 
reality itself, and makes it disappear in the non-delirious 
discourse of reason. 

3. The Return to the Immediate. Since madness is illusion, the 
cure of madness, if it is true that such a cure can be effected by 
theater, can also and still more directly be effected by the 


201 



suppression of theater. To entrust madness and its empty world 
directly to the plenitude of a nature which does not deceive 
because its immediacy does not acknowledge non-being, is to 
deliver madness both to its own truth (since madness, as a 
disease, is after all only a natural being), and to its closest 
contradiction (since delirium, as appearance without content, is 
the very contrary of the often secret and invisible wealth of 
nature). This contradiction thus appears as the reason of 
unreason, in a double sense: it withholds unreason’s causes, and 
at the same time conceals the principle of its suppression. It must 
be noted, however, that these themes are not contemporary with 
the classical period for its entire duration. Although they are 
organized around the same experience of unreason, they follow 
after the themes of theatrical representation; and their 
appearance marks the moment when the debate on being and 
illusion begins to yield to a problematics of nature. Games of 
theatrical illusion lose their meaning, and the artificial 
techniques of iconographic representation are replaced by the 
simple and confident act of a natural reduction. And this in an 
ambiguous direction, since it is as much a question of reduction 
by nature as of a reduction to nature. 

The return to the immediate is the therapeutics par excellence , 
because it is the rigorous refusal of therapeutics: it cures insofar 
as it is a disregard of all cures. It is in man’s passivity with regard 
to himself, in the silence he imposes on his art and his artifices, 
that nature engages in an activity which is exactly reciprocal to 
renunciation. For, to consider it more closely, this passivity of 
man is real activity; when man entrusts himself to medicine, he 
escapes the law of labor that nature itself imposes on him; he 
sinks into the world of artifice, and of anti-nature, of which his 
madness is only one of the manifestations; it is by ignoring this 
disease and resuming his place in the activity of natural beings 
that man in an apparent passivity (which is in fact only an 
industrious fidelity) succeeds in being cured. Thus Bernadin de 


202 



Saint-Pierre explains how he cured himself of a “strange disease,” 
in which, “like Oedipus, he saw two suns.” Medicine had offered 
him its succor, and had informed him that “the seat of his disease 
was in the nerves.” In vain he applied the most highly prized 
medicaments; he soon noticed that the physicians themselves 
were killed by their own remedies: “It was to Jean-Jacques 
Rousseau that I owed my return to health. I had read, in his 
immortal writings, among other natural truths, that man is made 
to work, not to meditate. Until that time I had exercised my soul 
and rested my body; I changed my ways; I exercised my body and 
rested my soul. I gave up most books; I turned my eyes to the 
works of nature, which addressed all my senses in a language that 
neither time nor nations can corrupt. My history and my 
newspapers were the plants of the field and forest; it was not my 
thoughts that struggled to them, as in the system of men, but 
their thoughts that came to me in a thousand agreeable 

shapes.”20 

Despite the formulations of it which certain disciples of 
Rousseau managed to propose, this return to the immediate was 
neither absolute nor simple. For madness, even if it is provoked 
or sustained by what is most artificial in society, appears, in its 
violent forms, as the savage expression of the most primitive 
human desires. Madness in the classical period, as we have seen, 
is rooted in the threats of bestiality—a bestiality completely 
dominated by predatory and murderous instincts. To entrust 
madness to nature would be, by an uncontrolled reversal, to 
abandon it to that fury of anti-nature. The cure of madness thus 
supposes a return to what is immediate, not in relation to desire, 
but in relation to the imagination—a return that dismisses from 
man’s life and pleasures everything that is artificial, unreal, 
imaginary. The therapeutics, by the reflective plunge into the 
immediate, secretly supposes the mediation of a wisdom which 
distinguishes, in nature, between what derives from violence and 


203 


what derives from truth. This is the whole difference between 
the Savage and the Laborer. “Savages ... lead the life of a 
carnivorous animal rather than that of a reasonable being”; the 
life of the Laborer, on the other hand, “is in fact happier than 
that of the man of the world.” On the savage’s side, immediate 
desire, without discipline, without constraint, without real 
morality; on the laborer’s side, pleasure without mediation, in 
other words, without vain stimulus, without provocation or 
imaginary achievement. What, in nature and its immediate 
virtues, cures madness is pleasure—but a pleasure that on one 
hand makes desire vain without even having to repress it, since it 
offers a plenitude of satisfaction in advance, and on the other 
makes imagination absurd, since it spontaneously contributes the 
happy presence of reality. “Pleasures enter into the eternal order 
of things; they exist invariably; certain conditions are necessary to 
form them ...; these conditions are not arbitrary; nature has 
formed them; imagination cannot create, and the man most 
devoted to pleasures can increase them only by renouncing all 
those which do not bear this stamp of nature. ”21 The immediate 
world of the laborer is thus a world suffused with wisdom and 
measure, which cures madness insofar as it renders desire useless, 
along with the movements of passion desire gives rise to, and 
also insofar as it reduces along with the imaginary all the 
possibilities of delirium. What Tissot understands by “pleasure” 
is this immediate curative agent, liberated from both passion and 
language: that is, from the two great forms of human experience 
that give birth to unreason. 

And perhaps nature, as the concrete form of the immediate, 
has an even more fundamental power in the suppression of 
madness. For it has the power of freeing man from his freedom. 
In nature—that nature, at least, which is measured by the double 
exclusion of the violence of desire and the unreality of 
hallucination—man is doubtless liberated from social constraints 


204 


(those which force him “to calculate and draw up the balance 
sheet of his imaginary pleasures which bear that name but are 
none”) and from the uncontrollable movement of the passions. 
But by that very fact, he is gently and as it were internally bound 
by a system of natural obligations. The pressures of the healthiest 
needs, the rhythm of the days and the seasons, the calm necessity 
to feed and shelter oneself, constrain the disorder of madmen to 
a regular observance. The excessively remote inventions of the 
imagination are dismissed, along with the excessively urgent 
disguises of desire. In the gentleness of a pleasure that does not 
constrain, man is linked to the wisdom of nature, and this 
fidelity in the form of freedom dissipates the unreason which 
juxtaposes in its paradox the extreme determinism of passion and 
the extreme fantasy of the image. Thus one begins to dream, in 
these mingled landscapes of ethics and medicine, of a liberation 
from madness: a liberation that must not be understood in its 
origin as the discovery, by philanthropy, of the humanity of 
madmen, but as a desire to open madness to the gentle 
constraints of nature. 

The old village of Gheel which, from the end of the Middle 
Ages, still bore witness to the now forgotten relation between the 
confinement of madmen and the exclusion of lepers, also 
received in the last years of the eighteenth century a sudden 
reinterpretation. What had once marked, here, the entire violent, 
pathetic separation of the world of madmen from the world of 
men, now conveyed the idyllic values of a rediscovered unity of 
unreason and nature. This village had once signified that 
madmen were confined, and that therefore the man of reason 
was protected from them; now it manifested that the madman 
was liberated, and that, in this liberty which put him on a level 
with the laws of nature, he was reconciled with the man of 
reason. At Gheel, according to Jouy s description of it, “four- 
fifths of the inhabitants are mad, but mad in the full sense of the 
word, and they enjoy without restraint the same freedom as the 


205 



other citizens.... Healthful food, pure air, all the devices of 
liberty: such is the regimen prescribed for them, and to which 
the greatest number, by the end of a year, owe their cure.” 
Without anything in the institutions having as yet really 
changed, the meaning of exclusion and of confinement begins to 
alter: it slowly assumes positive values, and the neutral, empty, 
nocturnal space in which unreason was formerly restored to its 
nothingness begins to be peopled by a nature to which madness, 
liberated, is obliged to submit. Confinement, as the separation of 
reason from unreason, is not suppressed; but at the very heart of 
its intention, the space it occupies reveals natural powers, more 
constraining for madness, more likely to subjugate it in its 
essence, than the whole of the old limiting and repressive system. 
Madness must be liberated from that system so that, in the space 
of confinement, now endowed with a positive efficacity, it will be 
free to slough off its savage freedom, and to welcome the 
demands of nature that are for it both truth and law. Insofar as it 
is law, nature constrains the violence of desire; insofar as it is 
truth, it reduces anti-nature, and all the hallucinations of the 
imaginary. 

Here is how Pinel describes that nature, speaking of the 
hospital of Saragossa: there has been established here “a sort of 
counterpoise to the mind’s extravagances by the attraction and 
the charm inspired by the cultivation of the fields, by the natural 
instinct that leads man to sow the earth and thus to satisfy his 
needs by the fruit of his labors. From morning on, you can see 
them ... leaving gaily for the various parts of a vast enclosure that 
belongs to the hospital, sharing with a sort of emulation the tasks 
appropriate to the seasons, cultivating wheat, vegetables, 
concerned in turn with the harvest, with trellises, with the 
vintage, with olive picking, and finding in the evening, in their 
solitary asylum, calm and quiet sleep. The most constant 
experience has indicated, in this hospital, that this is the surest 


206 



and most efficacious way to restore man to reason.”22 Beneath 
the conventional images, the rigor of a meaning is easily 
perceived. The return to the immediate is effective against 
unreason only insofar as the immediate is controlled—and 
divided against itself; an immediate in which violence is isolated 
from truth, savagery separated from liberty, in which nature can 
no longer recognize itself in the fantastic figures of anti-nature. 
In short, an immediate in which nature is mediatized by 
morality. In a space so arranged, madness will never again be able 
to speak the language of unreason, with all that in it transcends 
the natural phenomena of disease. It will be entirely enclosed in a 
pathology. A transformation which later periods have received as 
a positive acquisition, the accession, if not of a truth, at least of 
what would make the recognition of truth possible; but which in 
the eyes of history must appear as what it was: that is, the 
reduction of the classical experience of unreason to a strictly 
moral perception of madness, which would secretly serve as a 
nucleus for all the concepts that the nineteenth century would 
subsequently vindicate as scientific, positive, and experimental. 

This metamorphosis, which occurred in the second half of the 
eighteenth century, was initiated in the techniques of cure. But it 
very quickly appeared more generally, winning over the minds of 
reformers, guiding the great reorganization of the experience of 
madness in the last years of the century. Very soon Pinel could 
write: “How necessary it is, in order to forestall hypochondria, 
melancholia, or mania, to follow the immutable laws of 
morality!” 

In the classical period, it is futile to try to distinguish physical 
therapeutics from psychological medications, for the simple 
reason that psychology did not exist. When the consumption of 
bitters was prescribed, for example, it was not a question of 
physical treatment, since it was the soul as well as the body that 
was to be scoured; when the simple life of a laborer was 


207 


prescribed for a melancholic, when the comedy of his delirium 
was acted out before him, this was not a psychological 
intervention, since the movement of the spirits in the nerves, the 
density of the humors were principally involved. But in the first 
case, we are dealing with an art of the transformation of qualities , a 
technique in which the essence of madness is taken as nature, 
and as disease; in the second, we are dealing with an art of 
discourse, and of the restitution of truth , in which madness is 
significant as unreason. 

When, in the years that followed, this great experience of 
unreason, whose unity is characteristic of the classical period, was 
dissociated, when madness, entirely confined within a moral 
intuition, was nothing more than disease, then the distinction we 
have just established assumed another meaning; what had 
belonged to disease pertained to the organic, and what had 
belonged to unreason, to the transcendence of its discourse, was 
relegated to the psychological. And it is precisely here that 
psychology was born—not as the truth of madness, but as a sign 
that madness was now detached from its truth which was 
unreason and that it was henceforth nothing but a phenomenon 
adrift, insignificant upon the undefined surface of nature. An 
enigma without any truth except that which could reduce it. 

This is why we must do justice to Freud. Between Freud’s 
Five Case Histories and Janet’s scrupulous investigations of 
Psychological Healing , there is more than the density of a 
discovery, there is the sovereign violence of a return. Janet 
enumerated the elements of a division, drew up his inventory, 
annexed here and there, perhaps conquered. Freud went back to 
madness at the level of its language , reconstituted one of the 
essential elements of an experience reduced to silence by 
positivism; he did not make a major addition to the list of 
psychological treatments for madness; he restored, in medical 
thought, the possibility of a dialogue with unreason. Let us not 
be surprised that the most “psychological” of medications has so 


208 



quickly encountered its converse and its organic confirmations. It 
is not psychology that is involved in psychoanalysis: but precisely 
an experience of unreason that it has been psychology’s meaning, 
in the modern world, to mask. 


209 



VII 



210 


THE GREAT FEAR 


“ONE afternoon, I was there, looking a great deal, speaking 
rarely, listening as little as I could, when I was accosted by one of 
the most bizarre persons in this country, where God has not let 
them lack. He was a mixture of loftiness, baseness, good sense, 
and unreason.” 

In doubt’s confrontation with its major dangers, Descartes 
realized that he could not be mad—though he was to 
acknowledge for a long time to come that all the powers of 
unreason kept vigil around his thought; but as a philosopher, 
resolutely undertaking to doubt, he could not be “one of these 
insane ones.” Rameau’s Nephew, though, knew quite well—and 
among his fleeting certainties, this was the most obstinate—that 
he was mad. “Before beginning, he heaved a profound sigh and 
raised his hands to his forehead; then he regained his calm 
demeanor and said to me: you know I am ignorant, mad, 
impertinent, and lazy.”l 

The eighteenth century could not exactly understand the 
meaning expressed in Le Neveu de Rameau. Yet something had 
happened, just when the text was written, which promised a 
decisive change. A curious thing: the unreason that had been 
relegated to the distance of confinement reappeared, fraught 
with new dangers and as if endowed with a new power of 
interrogation. Yet what the eighteenth century first noticed 
about it was not the secret interrogation, but only the social 
effects: the torn clothing, the arrogance in rags, the tolerated 
insolence whose disturbing powers were silenced by an amused 
indulgence. The eighteenth century might not have recognized 
itself in Rameau’s Nephew, but it was entirely present in the 1 
who served him as interlocutor and as a type of “exhibitor,” 
amused yet reticent, and with a secret anxiety: for this was the 


211 


first time since the Great Confinement that the madman had 
become a social individual; it was the first time that anyone had 
entered into conversation with him, and that, once again, he was 
questioned. Unreason reappeared as a classification, which is not 
much; but it nonetheless reappeared, and slowly recovered its 
place in the familiarity of the social landscape. It was there some 
ten years before the Revolution, when Mercier found it without 
more astonishment than: “Go into another cafe; a man whispers 
to you in a calm and confident tone: ‘You cannot imagine, 
Monsieur, the Governmenfs ingratitude toward me, and its 
blindness to its own interests! For thirty years I have neglected 
my own affairs; I have shut myself up in my study, meditating, 
dreaming, calculating; I have devised a project to pay all the 
State’s debts; another to enrich the King and assure him an 
income of 400 million; another to destroy England forever, 
whose very name affronts me.... When, utterly devoted to these 
vast operations that demand all the application of genius, I was 
distracted by domestic problems, some nagging creditors kept 
me in prison for three years.... But, Monsieur, you see how 
patriotism is valued—I die unknown and a martyr for my 
country.’ ”2 At a distance, such persons form a circle around 
Rameau’s Nephew; they do not have his dimensions; it is only in 
the search for the picturesque that they can pass for his epigones. 

And yet they are a little more than a social profile, a caricatural 
silhouette. There is something inside them that concerns and 
touches the unreason of the eighteenth century. Their chatter, 
their anxiety, that vague delirium and that ultimate anguish they 
experience commonly enough—and in real existences which can 
still be traced. As with the libertine, the debauchee, or the 
ruffian of the end of the seventeenth century, it is difficult to say 
whether they are mad, sick, or criminal. Mercier himself does 
not quite know what status to give them: “Thus there are in Paris 
some very good people, economists and anti-economists, who 


212 


have warm hearts, eager for the public good; but unfortunately 
they have cracked heads', that is, they are shortsighted, they do not 
know what century they are in, nor what men they are dealing 
with; more unbearable than idiots, because with pennies and 
false lights they start from an impossible principle and reason 
falsely therefrom.” They really existed, these schemers with 
“cracked heads,” adding a muffled accompaniment of unreason 
to the reason of the philosophers, and around those plans for 
reform, those constitutions, those projects; the rationality of the 
Enlightenment found in them a sort of darkened mirror, an 
inoffensive caricature. But is it not essential that in a movement 
of amused indulgence, a personage of unreason is allowed back 
into daylight, at the very moment he was believed to be most 
profoundly hidden in the space of confinement? As if classical 
reason once again admitted a proximity, a relation, a quasi¬ 
resemblance between itself and the images of unreason. As if, at 
the moment of its triumph, reason revived and permitted to drift 
on the margins of order a character whose mask it had fashioned 
in derision—a sort of double in which it both recognized and 
revoked itself. 

Yet fear and anxiety were not far off: in the reaction of 
confinement, they reappeared, doubled. People were once afraid, 
people were still afraid, of being confined; at the end of the 
eighteenth century, Sade was still haunted by fear of what he 
called “the black men” who lay in wait to put him away. But now 
the estate of confinement acquired its own powers; it became in 
its turn the birthplace of evil, and could henceforth spread that 
evil by itself, instituting another reign of terror. 

Suddenly, in a few years in the middle of the eighteenth 
century, a fear arose—a fear formulated in medical terms but 
animated, basically, by a moral myth. People were in dread of a 
mysterious disease that spread, it was said, from the houses of 
confinement and would soon threaten the cities. They spoke of 


213 



prison fevers; they evoked the wagons of criminals, men in 
chains who passed through the cities, leaving disease in their 
wake; scurvy was thought to cause contagions; it was said that 
the air, tainted by disease, would corrupt the residential quarters. 
And the great image of medieval horror reappeared, giving birth, 
in the metaphors of dread, to a second panic. The house of 
confinement was no longer only the lazar house at the city’s 
edge; it was leprosy itself confronting the town: “A terrible ulcer 
upon the body politic, an ulcer that is wide, deep, and draining, 
one that cannot be imagined except by looking full upon it. Even 
the air of the place, which can be smelled four hundred yards 
away—everything suggests that one is approaching a place of 
violence, an asylum of degradation and infortune.”3 Many of 
these centers of confinement were built in the very places where 
the lepers had once been kept; it was as if, across the centuries, 
the new tenants had received the contagion. They revived the 
blazon and the meaning that had been borne in those places: 
“Too great a leper for the capital! The name of Bicetre is a word 
no one can pronounce without an inexpressible feeling of 
repugnance, of horror and contempt.... It has become the 
receptacle for all the most monstrous and vile things to be found 
in society.”4 

The evil which men had attempted to exclude by confinement 
reappeared, to the horror of the public, in a fantastic guise. There 
appeared, ramifying in every direction, the themes of an evil, 
both physical and moral, that enveloped in this very ambiguity 
the mingled powers of corrosion and horror. There prevailed, 
then, a sort of undifferentiated image of “rottenness” that had to 
do with the corruption of morals as well as with the 
decomposition of the flesh, and upon which were based both the 
repugnance and the pity felt for the confined. First the evil began 
to ferment in the closed spaces of confinement. It had all the 
virtues attributed to acid in eighteenth-century chemistry: its fine 


214 


particles, sharp as needles, penetrated bodies and hearts as easily 
as if they were passive and friable alkaline particles. The mixture 
boiled immediately, releasing harmful vapors and corrosive 
liquids: “These wards are a dreadful place where all crimes 
together ferment and spread around them, as by fermentation, a 
contagious atmosphere which those who live there breathe and 

which seems to become attached to them.” These burning 
vapors then rise, spread through the air, and finally fall upon the 
neighborhood, impregnating bodies and contaminating souls. 
Thus the idea of a contagion of evil-as-rottenness is articulated 
in images. The palpable agent of this epidemic is air, that air 
which is called “tainted,” the term obscurely suggesting that it is 
not in conformity with the purity of its nature, and that it acts as 
the communicating element of the taint. It is sufficient to 
remember the value, both moral and medical, ascribed at about 
the same period to country air (bodily health, spiritual vigor), to 
realize the whole complex of contrary meanings conveyed by the 
corrupted air of hospitals, prisons, houses of confinement. By 
this atmosphere laden with maleficent vapors, entire cities were 
threatened, whose inhabitants would be slowly impregnated with 
rottenness and taint. 

And these are not only reflections halfway between morality 
and medicine. We must doubtless take into account an entire 
literary development, a whole emotional, perhaps political 
exploitation of vague fears. But in certain cities there were 
movements of panic as real, as easy to date, as the great crises of 
horror that wracked the Middle Ages from time to time. In 1780 
an epidemic spread through Paris: its origin was attributed to the 
infection of the Hopital General; there was even talk of burning 
the buildings of Bicetre. The police lieutenant, faced with the 
frenzy of the population, sent a commission of inquiry which 
included, together with several staff doctors, the Dean of the 
Faculte and the physician of the Hopital General. According to 


215 


their findings, Bicetre was subject to a “putrid fever” which was 
linked to the bad quality of the air. As for the original source of 
the disease, the report denied that it lay in the internees and the 
infection they might spread; it must be attributed quite simply to 
the bad weather that made the disease endemic in the capital; the 
symptoms that were to be observed at the Hopital General were 
“in accordance with the nature of the season and exactly the same 
as the illnesses observed in Paris at the same period.” The 
population had to be reassured and Bicetre cleared of its guilt: 
“The rumors that have begun to spread concerning a contagious 
illness at Bicetre that is capable of infecting the capital are 
without foundation.” Evidently the report did not check the 
rumors completely, since some time later the physician of the 
Hopital General issued another in which he made the same 
statement; he was forced to acknowledge the poor sanitary 
conditions of Bicetre, but “matters have not, for all that, reached 
the cruel extremity of converting the refuge of these unfortunates 
into another source of inevitable evils much more lamentable 
than those which require a remedy as prompt as it is efficacious.” 

The circle was closed: all those forms of unreason which had 
replaced leprosy in the geography of evil, and which had been 
banished into the remotest social distance, now became a visible 
leprosy and offered their running sores to the promiscuity of 
men. Unreason was once more present; but marked now by an 
imaginary stigma of disease, which added its powers of terror. 

Thus it is in the realm of the fantastic and not within the rigor 
of medical thought that unreason joins illness and draws closer to 
it. Long before the problem of discovering to what degree the 
unreasonable is pathological was formulated, there had formed, 
in the space of confinement and by an alchemy peculiar to it, a 
melange combining the dread of unreason and the old specters of 
disease. From a great distance, the old confusions about leprosy 
functioned once again; and it is the vigor of these fantastic 
themes which was the first agent of synthesis between the world 


216 



of unreason and the medical universe. They first communicated 
through the hallucinations of fear, combining the infernal 
mixtures of “corruption” and “taint.” It is important, perhaps 
decisive for the place madness was to occupy in modern culture, 
that homo medicus was not called into the world of confinement 
as an arbiter , to divide what was crime from what was madness, 
what was evil from what was illness, but rather as a guardian, to 
protect others from the vague danger that exuded through the 
walls of confinement. It is easy to suppose that a free and 
generous sympathy awakened interest in the fate of the confined, 
and that a more diligent and informed medical attention could 
recognize disease where previously the authorities had 
indiscriminately punished transgressions. As it happened, the 
atmosphere was not one of such benevolent neutrality. If a 
doctor was summoned, if he was asked to observe, it was because 
people were afraid—afraid of the strange chemistry that seethed 
behind the walls of confinement, afraid of the powers forming 
there that threatened to propagate. The doctor came, once the 
conversion of images was effected, the disease having already 
assumed the ambiguous aspects of fermentation, of corruption, 
of tainted exhalations, of decomposed flesh. What is traditionally 
called “progress” toward madness’s attaining a medical status was 
in fact made possible only by a strange regression. In the 
inextricable mixture of moral and physical contagions,6 and by 
virtue of that symbolism of Impurity so familiar to the 
eighteenth century, very early images rose again to the surface of 
human memory. And it was as a result of this reactivation of 
images, more than by an improvement of knowledge, that 
unreason was eventually confronted by medical thought. 
Paradoxically, in the return to that fantastic life which mingles 
with the contemporary images of illness, positivism would gain a 
hold over unreason, or rather would discover a new reason for 
protecting itself against it. 


217 


The question, for the moment, was not to suppress the houses 
of confinement, but to neutralize them as potential causes of a 
new evil. The problem was to organize them while purifying 
them. The great reform movement that developed in the second 
half of the eighteenth century originated in the effort to reduce 
contamination by destroying impurities and vapors, abating 
fermentations, preventing evil and disease from tainting the air 
and spreading their contagion in the atmosphere of the cities. 
The hospital, the house of correction, all the places of 
confinement, were to be more completely isolated, surrounded 
by a purer air: this period produced a whole literature concerning 
the airing of hospitals, which tentatively approaches the medical 
problem of contagion, but aims more specifically at themes of 
moral communication. In 1776 a decree of the Council of State 
appointed a commission to determine “the degree of 
amelioration of which the various hospitals in France are in 
need.” Viel was instructed to rebuild the wards of La Salpetriere. 
The ideal was an asylum which, while preserving its essential 
functions, would be so organized that the evil could vegetate 
there without ever spreading; an asylum where unreason would 
be entirely contained and offered as a spectacle, without 
threatening the spectators; where it would have all the powers of 
example and none of the risks of contagion. In short, an asylum 
restored to its truth as a cage. It is this “sterilized” confinement, 
if we may employ an anachronistic term, that was still, in 1789, 
the dream of the Abbe Desmonceaux, in a little work dedicated 
to National Benevolence ; he planned to create a pedagogical 
instrument—a spectacle conclusively proving the drawbacks of 
immorality: “these guarded asylums ... are retreats as useful as 
they are necessary.... The sight of these shadowy places and the 
guilty creatures they contain is well calculated to preserve from 
the same acts of just reprobation the deviations of a too 
licentious youth; it is thus prudent of mothers and fathers to 
familiarize their children at an early age with these horrible and 


218 



detestable places, where shame and turpitude fetter crime, where 
man, corrupted in his essence, often loses forever the rights he 
had acquired in society.” 

Such are the dreams by which morality, in complicity with 
medicine, tried to defend itself against the dangers contained but 
insufficiently restricted by confinement. These same dangers, at 
the same time, fascinated men's imaginations and their desires. 
Morality dreams of exorcising them, but there is something in 
man which makes him dream of experiencing them, or at least of 
approaching them and releasing their hallucinations. The horror 
that now surrounded the fortresses of confinement also exercised 
an irresistible attraction. Such nights were peopled with 
inaccessible pleasures; such corrupt and ravaged faces became 
masks of voluptuousness; against these dark landscapes appeared 
forms—pains and delights—which echoed Hieronymus Bosch 
and his delirious gardens. The secrets that escaped from the 
chateau in the One Hundred and Twenty Days of Sodom have been 
murmured ever since: “There, the most infamous excesses are 
committed upon the very person of the prisoner; we hear of 
certain vices practiced frequently, notoriously, and even publicly 
in the common room of the prison, vices which the propriety of 
modern times does not permit us to name. We are told that 
numerous prisoners, simillimi feminis mores stuprati et 
constupratores\ that they return from this obscure, forbidden place 
covered over with their own and others’ debaucheries, lost to all 
shame and ready to commit all sorts of crimes.”7 And La 
Rochefoucauld-Liancourt in his turn evoked those figures of Old 
Women and Young Women in the correction wards of La 
Salpetriere, who from generation to generation communicate the 
same secrets and the same pleasures: “The correction ward is the 
place of greatest punishment for the House, containing when we 
visited it forty-seven girls, most of them very young, more 
thoughtless than guilty.... And always this confusion of ages, 


219 


this shocking mixture of frivolous girls with hardened women 
who can teach them only the art of the most unbridled 
corruption.” For a long time these visions would prowl insistently 
through the nights of the eighteenth century. For a moment they 
would be picked out by the pitiless light of Sade’s work and 
placed by it in the rigorous geometry of Desire. They would be 
taken up again and wrapped in the murky light of Goya’s 
Madhouse , or the twilight that surrounds the Quinta del Sordo. 
How closely the faces of the Disparates resemble them! A whole 
imaginary landscape reappears, conveyed by the Great Fear 
confinement now inspires. 

What the classical period had confined was not only an 
abstract unreason which mingled madmen and libertines, 
invalids, and criminals, but also an enormous reservoir of the 
fantastic, a dormant world of monsters supposedly engulfed in 
the darkness of Hieronymus Bosch which had once spewed them 
forth. One might say that the fortresses of confinement added to 
their social role of segregation and purification a quite opposite 
cultural function. Even as they separated reason from unreason 
on society’s surface, they preserved in depth the images where 
they mingled and exchanged properties. The fortresses of 
confinement functioned as a great, long silent memory; they 
maintained in the shadows an iconographic power that men 
might have thought was exorcised; created by the new classical 
order, they preserved, against it and against time, forbidden 
figures that could thus be transmitted intact from the sixteenth 
to the nineteenth century. In this abolished time, the Brocken 
joined Dulle Griet in the same imaginary landscape, and 
Noirceuil, the great legend of the Marechal de Rais. 
Confinement allowed, indeed called for, this resistance of 
imagery. 

But the images liberated at the end of the eighteenth century 
were not identical at all points with those the seventeenth 
century had tried to eliminate. Something had happened, in the 


220 



darkness, which detached them from that secret world where the 
Renaissance, after the Middle Ages, had found them; they had 
lodged in the hearts, in the desires, in the imaginations of men; 
and instead of manifesting to sight the abrupt presence of the 
insane, they seethed as the strange contradiction of human 
appetites: the complicity of desire and murder, of cruelty and the 
longing to suffer, of sovereignty and slavery, of insult and 
humiliation. The great cosmic conflict whose peripities had been 
revealed by the Insane in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, 
shifted until it became, at the end of the classical period, a 
dialectic lacking the heart’s mediation. Sadism is not a name 
finally given to a practice as old as Eros; it is a massive cultural 
fact which appeared precisely at the end of the eighteenth 
century, and which constitutes one of the greatest conversions of 
Western imagination: unreason transformed into delirium of the 
heart, madness of desire, the insane dialogue of love and death in 
the limitless presumption of appetite. Sadism appears at the very 
moment that unreason, confined for over a century and reduced 
to silence, reappears, no longer as an image of the world, no 
longer as a figura , but as language and desire. And it is no 
accident that sadism, as an individual phenomenon bearing the 
name of a man, was born of confinement and, within 
confinement, that Sade’s entire oeuvre is dominated by the 
images of the Fortress, the Cell, the Cellar, the Convent, the 
inaccessible Island which thus form, as it were, the natural 
habitat of unreason. It is no accident, either, that all the fantastic 
literature of madness and horror, which is contemporary with 
Sade’s oeuvre , takes place, preferentially, in the strongholds of 
confinement. And this whole sudden conversion of Western 
memory at the end of the eighteenth century, with its possibility 
of rediscovering—deformed and endowed with a new meaning— 
figures familiar at the end of the Middle Ages: was this 
conversion not authorized by the survival and the reawakening of 
the fantastic in the very places where unreason had been reduced 


221 



to silence? 


In the classical period, the awareness of madness and the 
awareness of unreason had not separated from one another. The 
experience of unreason that had guided all the practices of 
confinement so enveloped the awareness of madness that it very 
nearly permitted it to disappear, sweeping it along a road of 
regression where it was close to losing its most specific elements. 

But in the anxiety of the second half of the eighteenth century, 
the fear of madness grew at the same time as the dread of 
unreason: and thereby the two forms of obsession, leaning upon 
each other, continued to reinforce each other. And at the very 
moment we note the liberation of the iconographic powers that 
accompany unreason, we hear on all sides complaints about the 
ravages of madness. Already we are familiar with the concern 
generated by “nervous diseases,” and the awareness that man 
becomes more delicate in proportion as he perfects himself. As 
the century advanced, the concern became more pressing, the 
warnings more solemn. Already Raulin had observed that “since 
the birth of medicine ... these illnesses have multiplied, have 
become more dangerous, more complicated, more problematical 
and difficult to cure.” By Tissof s time, this general impression 
became a firm belief, a sort of medical dogma: nervous diseases 
“were formerly much less frequent than they are nowadays; and 
this for two reasons: one, that men were in general more robust, 
and less frequently ill; there were fewer diseases of any kind; the 
other, that the causes which produce nervous diseases in especial 
have multiplied in a greater proportion, in recent times, than the 
other general causes of illness, some of which even seem to have 
diminished.... I do not hesitate to say that if they were once the 
rarest, they are today the most frequent.’”’ And soon men 
regained that awareness, which had been so intense in the 
sixteenth century, of the precariousness of a reason that can at 
any moment be compromised, and definitively, by madness. 


222 


Matthey, a Geneva physician very close to Rousseau’s influence, 
formulates the prospect for all men of reason: “Do not glory in 
your state, if you are wise and civilized men; an instant suffices to 
disturb and annihilate that supposed wisdom of which you are so 
proud; an unexpected event, a sharp and sudden emotion of the 
soul will abruptly change the most reasonable and intelligent 
man into a raving idiot.” The threat of madness resumes its place 
among the emergencies of the century. 

This awareness, however, has a very special style. The 
obsession with unreason is a very affective one, involved in the 
movement of iconographic resurrections. The fear of madness is 
much freer with regard to this heritage; and while the return of 
unreason has the aspect of a massive repetition, connecting with 
itself outside of time, the awareness of madness is on the 
contrary accompanied by a certain analysis of modernity, which 
situates it from the start in a temporal, historical, and social 
context. In the disparity between the awareness of unreason and 
the awareness of madness, we have, at the end of the eighteenth 
century, the point of departure for a decisive movement: that by 
which the experience of unreason will continue, with Holderlin, 
Nerval, and Nietzsche, to proceed ever deeper toward the roots 
of time—unreason thus becoming, par excellence , the world’s 
contratempo —and the knowledge of madness seeking on the 
contrary to situate it ever more precisely within the development 
of nature and history. It is after this period that the time of 
unreason and the time of madness receive two opposing vectors: 
one being unconditioned return and absolute submersion; the 
other, on the contrary, developing according to the chronicle of a 
history. 9 

1. Madness and Liberty. For a long time, certain forms of 
melancholia were considered specifically English; this was a fact 
in medicine and a constant in literature. Montesquieu contrasted 
Roman suicide, which was a form of moral and political 


223 




behavior, the desired effect of a concerted education, with 
English suicide, which had to be considered as an illness since 
“the English kill themselves without any apparent reason for 
doing so; they kill themselves in the very lap of happiness.” It is 
here that the milieu plays its role, for if happiness in the 
eighteenth century is part of the order of nature and reason, 
unhappiness, or at least whatever deters from happiness without 
reason, must be part of another order. This order was sought first 
in the excesses of the climate, in nature’s deviation from its 
equilibrium and its happy mean (temperate climates are caused 
by nature; intemperate climates by the milieu). But this was not 
sufficient to explain la maladie anglaise ; already Cheyne had 
declared that wealth, refined food, the abundance all the 
inhabitants enjoyed, the life of pleasure and ease the richest 
society led, were at the origin of such nervous disorders. 
Increasingly, a political and economic explanation was sought, in 
which wealth, progress, institutions appear as the determining 
element of madness. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, 
Spurzheim made a synthesis of all these analyses in one of the 
last texts devoted to them. 10 Madness, “more frequent in 
England than anywhere else,” is merely the penalty of the liberty 
that reigns there, and of the wealth universally enjoyed. Freedom 
of conscience entails more dangers than authority and despotism. 
“Religious sentiments ... exist without restriction; every 
individual is entitled to preach to anyone who will listen to him,” 
and by listening to such different opinions, “minds are disturbed 
in the search for truth.” Dangers of indecision, of an irresolute 
attention, of a vacillating soul! The danger, too, of disputes, of 
passions, of obstinacy: “Everything meets with opposition, and 
opposition excites the feelings; in religion, in politics, in science, 
as in everything, each man is permitted to form an opinion; but 
he must expect to meet with opposition.” Nor does so much 
liberty permit a man to master time; every man is left to his own 


224 


uncertainty, and the State abandons all to their fluctuations: 
“The English are a nation of merchants; a mind always occupied 
with speculations is continually agitated by fear and hope. 
Egotism, the soul of commerce, easily becomes envious and 
summons other faculties to its aid.” Besides, this liberty is far 
from true natural liberty: on all sides it is constrained and harried 
by demands opposed to the most legitimate desires of 
individuals: this is the liberty of interests, of coalitions, of 
financial combinations, not of man, not of minds and hearts. For 
financial reasons, families are here more tyrannical than 
anywhere else: only wealthy girls are able to marry; “the others 
are reduced to other means of satisfaction that ruin the body and 
derange the manifestations of the soul. The same cause favors 
libertinage, which predisposes to madness.” A mercantile liberty 
thus appears as the element in which opinion can never arrive at 
the truth, in which the immediate is necessarily subject to 
contradiction, in which time escapes the mastery and certainty of 
the seasons, in which man is dispossessed of his desires by the 
laws of interest. In short, liberty, far from putting man in 
possession of himself, ceaselessly alienates him from his essence 
and his world; it fascinates him in the absolute exteriority of 
other people and of money, in the irreversible interiority of 
passion and unfulfilled desire. Between man and the happiness 
of a world in which he recognizes himself, between man and a 
nature in which he finds his truth, the liberty of the mercantile 
state is “milieu”: and to this very degree it is the determining 
element of madness. When Spurzheim was writing—at the 
height of the Holy Alliance, during the restoration of the 
authoritarian monarchies—liberalism was readily blamed for all 
the sins of the world’s madness: “It is singular to see that man s 
greatest desire, which is his personal liberty, has its disadvantages 
as well.” But for us, the point of such an analysis is not its 
critique of liberty, but its very employment of the notion that 
designates for Spurzheim the non-natural milieu in which the 


225 



psychological and physiological mechanisms of madness are 
favored, amplified, and multiplied. 

2. Madness , Religion , and Time. Religious beliefs prepare a 
kind of landscape of images, an illusory milieu favorable to every 
hallucination and every delirium. For a long time, doctors were 
suspicious of the effects of too strict a devotion, too strong a 
belief. Too much moral rigor, too much anxiety about salvation 
and the life to come were often thought to bring on melancholia. 
The Encyclopedie does not fail to cite such cases: “The 
intemperate impressions made by certain extravagant preachers, 
the excessive fears they inspire of the pains with which our 
religion threatens those who break its laws, produce astonishing 
revolutions in weak minds. At the hospital of Montelimar, 
several women were reported suffering from mania and 
melancholia as a result of a mission held in that city; these 
creatures were ceaselessly struck by the horrible images that had 
thoughtlessly been presented to them; they spoke of nothing but 
despair, revenge, punishment, etc., and one of them absolutely 
refused to undergo any cure, convinced that she was in Hell and 
that nothing could extinguish the fire she believed was devouring 
her.” Pinel follows the line of these enlightened physicians— 
forbidding books of devotion to be given to “melancholics by 
piety,” even recommending solitary confinement for “religious 
persons who believe themselves to be inspired and who seek to 
make proselytes.” But this again is more of a critique than a 
positive analysis: the religious object or theme is suspected of 
arousing delirium and hallucination by the delirious and 
hallucinatory nature attributed to it. Pinel reports the case of a 
recently cured madman who had “read in a religious book ... that 
each man has his guardian angel; on the following night, he 
thought he was surrounded by a choir of angels and imagined he 
heard celestial music and received revelations.” Religion is 
considered here only as an element in the transmission of error. 
But even before Pinel, there had been analyses of a more rigorous 


226 



historical nature, in which religion appeared as a milieu of 
satisfaction or repression of the passions. In 1781 a German 
author described as happy those distant eras when priests were 
endowed with absolute powers: then idleness did not exist, every 
moment was marked by “ceremonies, religious practices, 
pilgrimages, visits to the poor and the sick, calendar festivals.”! 1 
Time was thus assigned to an organized happiness, which left no 
leisure for empty passions, for disgust with life, for boredom. If a 
man felt guilty, he was subjected to real, often material 
punishment which occupied his mind and gave him an assurance 
that the transgression was redressed. And when the confessor 
encountered those “hypochondriacal penitents who came too 
often to confession,” he assigned them as penance either a severe 
hardship that “diluted their too thick blood,” or long pilgrimages: 
“The change of air, the length of the road, absence from home, 
distance from the things which upset them, their associations 
with other pilgrims, the slow and energetic movement of 
walking, had more effect upon them than the comfortable 
journeys ... that in our day take the place of pilgrimages.” 
Finally, the sacred nature of the priest gave each of his 
injunctions an absolute value, and no one dreamed of trying to 
avoid it; “usually the whims of sick people deny all this to the 
physician.” For Moehsen, religion is the mediation between man 
and transgression, between man and punishment: in the form of 
an authoritarian synthesis, it suppresses the transgression by 
imposing the punishment; if, on the contrary, religion loosens its 
hold but maintains the ideal forms of remorse of conscience, of 
spiritual mortification, it leads directly to madness; only the 
consistency of the religious milieu can permit man to escape 
alienation in the excessive delirium of transgressions. By 
accomplishing its rites and its requirements, man avoids both the 
useless idleness of his passions before the transgression, and the 
vain repetition of his remorse once the transgression is 


227 


committed; religion organizes all human life around fulfillment 
of the moment. That old religion of happier times was the 
perpetual celebration of the present. But once it was idealized in 
the modern age, religion cast a temporal halo around the present, 
an empty milieu—that of idleness and remorse, in which the 
heart of man is abandoned to its own anxiety, in which the 
passions surrender time to unconcern or to repetition in which, 
finally, madness can function freely. 

3. Madness, Civilization , and Sensibility. Civilization, in a 
general way, constitutes a milieu favorable to the development of 
madness. If the progress of knowledge dissipates error, it also has 
the effect of propagating a taste and even a mania for study; the 
life of the library, abstract speculations, the perpetual agitation of 
the mind without the exercise of the body, can have the most 
disastrous effects. Tissot explains that in the human body it is 
those parts subject to frequent work which are first strengthened 
and hardened; among laborers, the muscles and fibers of the 
arms harden, giving them their physical strength and the good 
health they enjoy until an advanced age; “among men of letters, 
the brain hardens; often they become incapable of connecting 
their ideas,” and so are doomed to dementia. The more abstract 
or complex knowledge becomes, the greater the risk of madness. 
A body of knowledge still close to what is most immediate in the 
senses, requiring, according to Pressavin, only a little work on 
the part of the inner sense and organs of the brain, provokes only 
a sort of physiological happiness: “The sciences whose objects are 
easily perceived by our senses, which offer the soul agreeable 
relations because of the harmony of their consonance ... perform 
throughout the entire bodily machine a light activity which is 
beneficial to all the functions.” On the contrary, a knowledge too 
poor in these sensuous relations, too free with regard to the 
immediate, provokes a tension of the brain alone which 
disequilibrates the whole body; sciences “of things whose 
relationships are difficult to grasp because they are not readily 


228 



available to our senses, or because their too complicated relations 
oblige us to expend great application in their study, present the 
soul with an exercise that greatly fatigues the inner sense by a too 
continuous tension upon that organ.” Knowledge thus forms 
around feeling a milieu of abstract relationships where man risks 
losing the physical happiness in which his relation to the world is 
usually established. Knowledge multiplies, no doubt, but its cost 
increases too. Is it certain that there are more wise men today? 
One thing, at least, is certain: “there are more people who have 
the infirmities of wisdom.” The milieu of knowledge grows faster 
than knowledge itself. 

But it is not only knowledge that detaches man from feeling; it 
is sensibility itself: a sensibility that is no longer controlled by the 
movements of nature, but by all the habits, all the demands of 
social life. Modern man—but woman more than man—turns day 
into night and night into day: “The moment at which our 
women rise in Paris is far removed from that which nature has 
indicated; the best hours of the day have slipped away; the purest 
air has disappeared; no one has benefited from it. The vapors, 
the harmful exhalations, attracted by the sun’s heat, are already 
rising in the atmosphere; this is the hour that beauty chooses to 
rise.’ ”12 This disorder of the senses continues in the theater, 
where illusions are cultivated, where vain passions and the most 
fatal movements of the soul are aroused by artifice; women 
especially enjoy these spectacles “that inflame and arouse them”; 
their souls “are so strongly shaken that this produces a 
commotion in their nerves, fleeting, in truth, but whose 
consequences are usually serious; the momentary loss of their 
senses, the tears they shed at the performances of our modern 
tragedies are the least accidents that can result from them.”13 
Novels form a still more artificial milieu, and are more dangerous 
to a disordered sensibility; the verisimilitude modern authors 
attempt to produce, and all the art they employ to imitate truth, 


229 


only give more prestige to the violent and dangerous sentiments 
they seek to awaken in their female readers: “In the earliest 
epochs of French gallantry and manners, the less perfected minds 
of women were content with facts and events as marvelous as 
they were unbelievable; now they demand believable facts yet 
sentiments so marvelous that their own minds are disturbed and 
confounded by them; they then seek, in all that surrounds them, 
to realize the marvels by which they are enchanted; but 
everything seems to them without sentiment and without life, 
because they are trying to find what does not exist in nature.” 14 
The novel constitutes the milieu of perversion, par excellence, of 
all sensibility; it detaches the soul from all that is immediate and 
natural in feeling and leads it into an imaginary world of 
sentiments violent in proportion to their unreality, and less 
controlled by the gentle laws of nature; “The existence of so 
many authors has produced a host of readers, and continued 
reading generates every nervous complaint; perhaps of all the 
causes that have harmed women’s health, the principal one has 
been the infinite multiplication of novels in the last hundred 
years ... a girl who at ten reads instead of running will, at twenty, 
be a woman with the vapors and not a good nurse. ”15 

Slowly, and still in a very scattered fashion, the eighteenth 
century constituted, around its awareness of madness and of its 
threatening spread, a whole new order of concepts. In the 
landscape of unreason where the sixteenth century had located it, 
madness concealed a meaning and an origin that were obscurely 
moral; its secrecy related it to sin, and the animality imminently 
perceived in it did not make it, paradoxically, more innocent. In 
the second half of the eighteenth century, madness was no longer 
recognized in what brings man closer to an immemorial fall or an 
indefinitely present animality; it was, on the contrary, situated in 
those distances man takes in regard to himself, to his world, to 
all that is offered by the immediacy of nature; madness became 


230 


possible in that milieu where mans relations with his feelings, 
with time, with others, are altered; madness was possible because 
of everything which, in mans life and development, is a break 
with the immediate. Madness was no longer of the order of 
nature or of the Fall, but of a new order, in which men began to 
have a presentiment of history, and where there formed, in an 
obscure originating relationship, the “alienation” of the 
physicians and the “alienation” of the philosophers—two 
configurations in which man in any case corrupts his truth, but 
between which the nineteenth century, after Hegel, soon lost all 
trace of resemblance. 


231 



VIII 



232 


THE NEW DIVISION 


EVERY psychiatrist, every historian yielded, at the beginning of 
the nineteenth century, to the same impulse of indignation; 
everywhere we find the same outrage, the same virtuous censure: 
“No one blushed to put the insane in prison/’ And Esquirol, 
listing the fortress of Ha in Bordeaux, the houses of correction in 
Toulouse and Rennes, the “Bicetres” still existing in Poitiers, in 
Caen, in Amiens, the “Chateau” of Angers, continues: 
“Moreover, there are few prisons where the raving mad are not to 
be found; these unfortunates are chained in dungeons beside 
criminals. What a monstrous association! The calm madmen are 
treated worse than malefactors.” 

The entire century echoes him; in England, it was the Tukes, 
who had turned historians and apologists for their ancestral 
occupation; in Germany, after Wagnitz, it was Reil who groaned 
over those wretches “thrown, like State criminals, into dungeons 
where the eye of humanity never penetrates.” The age of 
positivism, for over half a century, constantly claimed to have 
been the first to free the mad from a lamentable confusion with 
the felonious, to separate the innocence of unreason from the 
guilt of crime. 

Yet it is simple enough to show the vanity of this claim. For 
years the same protests had been raised; before Reil, there had 
been Franck: “Those who have visited the insane asylums of 
Germany recall with dread what they have seen. One is horrified 
upon entering these asylums of misery and affliction; one hears 
only cries of despair, yet here dwells the man distinguished by his 
talents and his virtues.” Before Esquirol, before Pinel, there had 
been La Rochefoucauld-Liancourt, there had been Tenon; and 
before them, an incessant murmur throughout the eighteenth 
century, composed of insistent protests, lodged year after year 


233 



even by those whom one would have thought the most 
indifferent, the most eager perhaps that such a confusion should 
subsist. Twenty-five years before the exclamations of a Pinel, we 
must invoke Malesherbes “visiting the State prisons with the 
intention of breaking down their gates. Prisoners whom he 
found to be insane ... were sent to houses where the society, the 
exercise, and the care he had scrupulously prescribed would be 
sure, he said, to cure them.” Still earlier in the century, and in a 
lower voice, there had been all those directors, those bursars, 
those overseers who from generation to generation always asked 
and sometimes achieved the same thing: the separation of 
madmen from convicts; there had been the Prior of La Charite 
in Senlis who begged the police to remove several prisoners and 
confine them instead in any of several fortresses; there had been 
that overseer of the House of Correction in Brunswick who 
asked—and this was only in 1713—that the madmen not be 
allowed to mingle with the internees assigned to the workshops. 
Had not what the nineteenth century formulated so 
ostentatiously, with all the resources of its pathos, already been 
whispered and indefatigably repeated by the eighteenth? Did 
Esquirol and Reil and the Tukes do anything more than shout at 
the top of their lungs what had been, for years, commonplaces of 
asylum practice? The slow emigration of the mad which we have 
mentioned, from 1720 to the Revolution, was probably no more 
than the most visible effect of that practice. 

And yet, let us listen to what was being said in this half¬ 
silence. When the Prior of Senlis asked that madmen be 
separated from certain convicts, what were his arguments? “He is 
deserving of mercy, as well as two or three others who would be 
better off in some citadel, because of the company of six others 
who are mad, and who torment them night and day.” And the 
meaning of this sentence would be so clearly understood by the 
police that the internees in question would be set free. And the 
demands of the Brunswick overseer have the same meaning: the 


234 



workshop is disturbed by the cries and the confusion of the 
insane; their frenzy is a perpetual danger, and it would be better 
to send them back to the cells, or to keep them in chains. And 
already, we can anticipate that from one century to the next, the 
same protests did not have, at bottom, the same value. Early in 
the nineteenth century, there was indignation that the mad were 
not treated any better than those condemned by common law or 
than State prisoners; throughout the eighteenth century, 
emphasis was placed on the fact that the prisoners deserved a 
better fate than one that lumped them with the insane. For 
Esquirol, the scandal is due to the fact that the mad are only 
mad; for the Prior of Senlis, to the fact that the convicts are, after 
all, only convicts. 

A difference which is perhaps not of such significance, and 
which ought to have been easily perceived. And yet, it is 
necessary to emphasize it in order to understand how the 
consciousness of madness was transformed in the course of the 
eighteenth century. It did not evolve in the context of a 
humanitarian movement that gradually related it more closely to 
the madman s human reality, to his most affecting and most 
intimate aspect; nor did it evolve under the pressure of a 
scientific need that made it more attentive, more faithful to what 
madness might have to say for itself. If it slowly changed, it was 
within that simultaneously real and artificial space of 
confinement. Certain imperceptible shifts in its structures, or at 
times certain violent crises, gradually formed the awareness of 
madness contemporaneous with the Revolution. No medical 
advance, no humanitarian approach was responsible for the fact 
that the mad were gradually isolated, that the monotony of 
insanity was divided into rudimentary types. It was the depths of 
confinement itself that generated the phenomenon; it is from 
confinement that we must seek an account of this new awareness 
of madness. 

A political more than a philanthropic awareness. For if the 


235 



eighteenth century perceived that there were among the confined 
—among the libertines, the debauched, the prodigal sons— 
certain men whose confusion and disorder were of another 
nature, and whose anxiety was irreducible, this perception was 
the result of the confined themselves. They were the first to 
protest, and with the most violence. Ministers, police officers, 
magistrates were assailed with the same endless and tirelessly 
repeated complaints: one man writes to Maurepas, indignant at 
being “forced to mingle with madmen, some of whom are so 
violent that at every moment I risk suffering dangerous abuse 
from them”; another—the Abbe de Montcrif—makes the same 
complaint to Lieutenant Berryer: “This is the ninth month that I 
have been confined here in this dreadful place with fifteen or 
twenty raving madmen, pell-mell with epileptics.” The farther 
we advance into the century, the stronger grow these protests 
against confinement: increasingly, madness becomes the specter 
of the internees, the very image of their humiliation, of their 
reason vanquished and reduced to silence. The day soon comes 
when Mirabeau recognizes in the shameful promiscuity of 
madness both a subtle instrument of brutality against those to be 
punished and the very image of despotism, bestiality triumphant. 
The madman is not the first and the most innocent victim of 
confinement, but the most obscure and the most visible, the 
most insistent of the symbols of the confining power. Tyranny 
secretly persists among the confined in this lurid presence of 
unreason. The struggle against the established powers, against 
the family, against the Church, continues at the very heart of 
confinement, in the saturnalia of reason. And madness so well 
represents these punishing powers that it effectively plays the 
part of an additional punishment, a further torment which 
maintains order in the uniform chastisement of the houses of 
correction. La Rochefoucauld-Liancourt bears witness to this in 
his report to the Committee on Mendicity: “One of the 
punishments inflicted upon the epileptics and upon the other 


236 



patients of the wards, even upon the deserving poor, is to place 
them among the mad.” The scandal lies only in the fact that the 
madmen are the brutal truth of confinement, the passive 
instrument of all that is worst about it. Is this not symbolized by 
the fact—also a commonplace of all the literature of confinement 
in the eighteenth century—that a sojourn in a house of 
correction necessarily leads to madness? Having to live in this 
delirious world, amid the triumph of unreason, how may one 
avoid joining, by the fatality of the site and the event, the very 
men who are its living symbol? “I observe that the majority of the 
insane confined in the houses of correction and the State prisons 
have become so, the latter through the excess of ill-treatment, 
the former through the horror of the solitude in which they 
continually encounter the harassments of an imagination 
sharpened by pain.”l 

The presence of madmen among the prisoners is not the 
scandalous limit of confinement, but its truth; not abuse, but 
essence. The polemic instituted by the eighteenth century against 
confinement certainly dealt with the enforced mingling of the 
mad and the sane; but it did not deal with the basic relation 
acknowledged between madness and confinement. Whatever 
attitude is adopted, that, at least, is not in question. Mirabeau, 
the Friend of Man, is as severe about confinement as about the 
confined themselves; in his eyes, no one confined in “the 
celebrated State prisons” is innocent; but his place is not in these 
costly institutions, where he drags out a useless life; why confine 
“daughters of joy who, transported to provincial manufactories, 
could become daughters of labor”? Or “rascals who are waiting 
only for freedom in order to get themselves hanged? Why are 
these people, attached to walking fetters, not employed at those 
tasks which might prove harmful to voluntary workers? They 
would serve as an example ...” Once this entire population was 
removed, who would remain in the houses of confinement? 


237 


Those who could not be placed anywhere else, and who belong 
there by right: “Some prisoners of State whose crimes must not 
be revealed,” to whom may be added “old men who, having 
consumed in debauchery and dissipation all the fruit of their 
life’s labor, and having cherished the ambitious prospect of dying 
in a hospital, come there in peace”; finally, the mad, who must 
wallow somewhere: “These last can vegetate anywhere. ”2 
Mirabeau the younger conducts his demonstration in the 
opposite direction: “I formally defy anyone in the world to prove 
that State prisoners, rascals, libertines, madmen, ruined old men 
constitute I do not say the majority, but the third, the fourth, the 
tenth part of the inhabitants of fortresses, houses of correction, 
and State prisons.” For him the scandal is thus not that the mad 
are mingled with the criminal, but that they do not constitute, 
together, the essential part of the confined population; who then 
can complain of being forced to mix with criminals? Not those 
who have lost their reason forever, but those who in their youth 
spent their time in wildness: “I might ask ... why rascals and 
libertines are mingled together.... I could ask why young men 
with dangerous dispositions are left with men who will rapidly 
lead them to the last degree of corruption.... Finally, if this 
confusion of libertines and villains exists, as is all too true, why 
do we, by this odious, infamous, atrocious combination, make 
ourselves guilty of the most abominable of all crimes, that of 
leading men into crime?” As for madmen, what other fate could 
be desired for them? Neither reasonable enough not to be 
confined, nor wise enough not to be treated as wicked, “it is all 
too true that those who have lost the use of reason must be 

hidden from society.”^ 

We see how the political critique of confinement functioned 
in the eighteenth century. Not in the direction of a liberation of 
the mad; nor can we say that it permitted a more philanthropic 
or a greater medical attention to the insane. On the contrary, it 


238 


linked madness more firmly than ever to confinement, and this 
by a double tie: one which made madness the very symbol of the 
confining power and its absurd and obsessive representative 
within the world of confinement; the other which designated 
madness as the object par excellence of all the measures of 
confinement. Subject and object, image and goal of repression, 
symbol of its blind arbitrariness and justification of all that could 
be reasonable and deserved within it: by a paradoxical circle, 
madness finally appears as the only reason for a confinement 
whose profound unreason it symbolizes. Still so close to this 
eighteenth-century notion, Michelet would formulate it with an 
astonishing rigor; he returns to the very movement of Mirabeau’s 
thought, apropos of the stay the latter made at Vincennes at the 
same time as Sade: 

First, confinement causes alienation: “Prison makes men mad. 
Those found in the Bastille and in Bicetre were stupefied.” 

Secondly, what is most unreasonable, most shameful, most 
profoundly immoral in the tyranny of the eighteenth century is 
represented in the space of confinement, and by a madman: “We 
have seen the frenzies of La Salpetriere. A dreadful lunatic 
existed at Vincennes, the poisonous de Sade, writing in the hope 
of corrupting the time to come.” 

Thirdly, it is for this one madman alone that confinement 
ought to have been reserved, and nothing of the kind was done: 
“He was soon set free, and Mirabeau kept in confinement.” 

Hence an abyss yawns in the middle of confinement; a void 
which isolates madness, denounces it for being irreducible, 
unbearable to reason; madness now appears with what 
distinguishes it from all these confined forms as well. The 
presence of the mad appears as an injustice; but for others. The 
undifferentiated unity of unreason had been broken. Madness 
was individualized, strangely twinned with crime, at least linked 
with it by a proximity which had not yet been called into 


239 



question. In this confinement drained of a part of its content, 
these two figures—madness, crime—subsist alone; by 
themselves, they symbolize what may be necessary about it; they 
alone are what henceforth deserves to be confined. Having taken 
its distance, having finally become an assignable form in the 
confused world of unreason, did not liberate madness; between 
madness and confinement, a profound relation had been 
instituted, a link which was almost one of essence. 

But at the same moment, confinement suffered another, still 
deeper crisis that called into question not only its repressive role 
but its very existence; a crisis which arose not from within, and 
which was not attached to political protests, but which slowly 
appeared on the entire social and economic horizon. 

Poverty was gradually being freed from the old moral 
confusions. Men had seen unemployment assume, during crises, 
an aspect that could no longer be identified with that of sloth; 
had seen indigence and idleness forced to spread into the 
countryside, where men had supposed they could recognize 
precisely the most immediate and the purest forms of moral life; 
all this revealed that poverty was perhaps not only of the order of 
transgression: “Mendicity is the fruit of poverty, which itself is 
the result of accidents occurring either in the cultivation of the 
land or in the production of manufactures, or in the rise of 
commodity prices, in an excess of population, etc....”4 Poverty 
had become an economic phenomenon. 

But not contingent—nor destined to be suppressed forever. 
There was a certain quantity of indigence which man would not 
succeed in eliminating—a kind of fatality of poverty which must 
accompany all the forms of society to the end of time, even 
where all the idle were employed: “There need be, in a well- 
governed state, only those poor born in indigence, or those who 

fall into it by accident.” This basic poverty was in a sense 
inalienable: birth or accident, it formed a part of life that could 


240 



not be avoided. For a long time, it was inconceivable to have a 
state in which there were no paupers, so deeply did need appear 
to be inscribed in man s fate and in the structure of society: 
property, labor, and poverty are terms which remain linked in the 
thought of philosophers until the nineteenth century. 

Necessary because it could not be suppressed, this role of 
poverty was necessary too because it made wealth possible. 
Because they labor and consume little, those who are in need 
permit a nation to enrich itself, to set a high value on its fields, 
its colonies, and its mines, to manufacture products which will be 
sold the world over; in short, a people would be poor which had 
no paupers. Indigence becomes an indispensable element in the 
State. In it is concealed the secret but also the real life of a 
society. The poor constitute the basis and the glory of nations. 
And their poverty, which cannot be suppressed, must be exalted 
and revered: “My purpose is merely to attract a share of that 
vigilant attention [that of the government] to the suffering 
portion of the People ...; the succor it is owed derives essentially 
from the honor and the prosperity of an Empire, of which the 
Poor are everywhere the firmest support, for a sovereign cannot 
preserve and extend his realm without favoring the population, 
the cultivation of the Land, the Arts, and commerce; and the 
Poor are the necessary agents of these great powers which 

establish the true strength of a People.Here is an entire moral 
rehabilitation of the Pauper, which designates, at a deeper level, 
a social and economic reintegration of his role and character. In 
the mercantilist economy, the Pauper, being neither producer 
nor consumer, had no place: idle, vagabond, unemployed, he 
belonged only to confinement, a measure by which he was exiled 
and as it were abstracted from society. With the nascent industry 
which needs manpower, he once again plays a part in the body of 
the nation. 

Thus, economic thought elaborates on new foundations the 


241 


notion of poverty. There had been the entire Christian tradition 
for which the Poor Man had had a real and concrete existence, a 
presence of flesh and blood: an always individual countenance of 
need, the symbolic passage of God in man’s image. The 
abstraction of confinement had removed the Poor Man, had 
identified him with other figures, enveloping him in an ethical 
condemnation, but had not dissociated him from his features. 
The eighteenth century discovered that “the Poor” did not exist 
as a concrete and final reality; that in them, two realities of 
different natures had too long been confused. 

On one hand, there was Poverty, scarcity of commodities and 
money, an economic situation linked to the state of commerce, 
of agriculture, of industry. On the other, there was Population'. 
not a passive element subject to the fluctuations of wealth, but a 
force which directly contributed to the economic situation, to the 
production of wealth, since it is man’s labor which creates—or at 
least transmits, shifts, and multiplies—wealth. The “Poor Man” 
was a vague notion in which were combined that wealth which is 
Man and the state of Need which is acknowledged as essential to 
humanity. Indeed, between Poverty and Population, there is a 
rigorously inverse relation. 

Physiocrats and economists are in agreement on this. 
Population is in itself one of the elements of wealth; it forms, 
indeed, its certain and inexhaustible source. For Francis 
Quesnay and his disciples, man is the essential mediation 
between the land and wealth: “A man is worth as much as the land , 
according to an old proverb. If a man is valueless, so is the land. 
With men, one doubles the land one possesses; one clears it, one 
acquires it. God alone could from the earth make a man, whereas 
all over the world it has been possible to have land by means of 
men, or at least the product of the land, which comes down to 
the same thing. It follows that the first good is the possession of 
men, and the second, of the land.”7 


242 


For the economists, the population is a good quite as essential, 
if not more so, since in their view wealth is created not only in 
agricultural labor, but in every industrial transformation, and 
even in commercial circulation. Wealth is linked to a labor 
actually effected by man: “The State having real wealth only in 
the annual products of its lands and in the industry of its 
inhabitants, its wealth will be at a maximum when the product of 
each acre of land and of the industry of each individual is raised 
to its maximum.”8 Paradoxically, a population will be precious in 
proportion to its numbers, since it will afford industry a cheap 
labor force, which, by lowering the cost price, will permit a 
development of production and of commerce. In this infinitely 
open labor market, the “fundamental price”—what corresponds 
for Turgot to the worker’s subsistence—and the price 
determined by supply and demand ultimately coincide. A nation 
will therefore be favored in commercial competition to the 
degree that it has at its disposal the greatest potential wealth of a 
numerous population. 

Confinement was a gross error, and an economic mistake: 
poverty was to be suppressed by removing and maintaining by 
charity a poor population. Actually, it was poverty that was being 
artificially masked; and a part of the population was being really 
suppressed, wealth being always constant. Was the intention to 
help the poor escape their provisional indigence? They were kept 
from doing so: the labor market was limited, which was all the 
more dangerous in that this was precisely a period of crisis. On 
the contrary, the high cost of products should have been palliated 
by a cheap labor force, their scarcity being compensated by a new 
industrial and agricultural effort. The only reasonable remedy: to 
restore this entire population to the circuit of production, in 
order to distribute it to the points where the labor force was 
rarest. To utilize the poor, vagabonds, exiles, and emigres of all 
kinds, was one of the secrets of wealth, in the competition 


243 



among nations: “What is the best means of weakening the 
neighboring states whose power and industry tend to overshadow 
us?” asked Josias Tucker apropos of the emigration of the 
Protestants. “Is it to force their subjects to remain at home by 
refusing to receive and incorporate them among us, or is it to 
attract them to us by good wages, allowing them to enjoy the 
advantages of the other citizens?” 

Confinement is open to criticism because of the repercussions 
it can have on the labor market; but still more, because it 
constitutes, and with it the entire enterprise of traditional 
charity, a dangerous financing. Like the Middle Ages, the 
classical period had always sought to provide aid to the poor by 
the system of foundations. This meant that a share of land 
capital or income was thereby immobilized. And for good, since, 
in the just concern to avoid the commercialization of the charity 
enterprises, all juridical measures were taken so that these goods 
would never return to circulation. But with the passage of time, 
their utility diminished; the economic situation changed, poverty 
altered its aspect: “Society does not always have the same needs; 
nature and the distribution of property, the division between the 
different orders of the people, the opinions, the customs, the 
general occupations of the nation or of its different portions, the 
climate itself, the diseases and other accidents of human life 
undergo a continual variation; new needs are born; others cease 
to make themselves felt.”9 The definitive character of the 
foundation was in contradiction to the variable and indefinite 
rate of the accidental needs which it was supposed to satisfy. 
Without the wealth which it immobilized being restored to 
circulation, new wealth had to be created as new needs appeared. 
The share of funds and revenues which were set aside constantly 
increased, thereby diminishing the productive share. Which 
inevitably led to a greater poverty, hence to more numerous 
foundations. And the process could extend indefinitely. The 


244 


moment could come when “the ever multiplying foundations 
would ultimately absorb all funds and all private property.” Upon 
close scrutiny, the classical forms of aid were a cause of 
impoverishment, the gradual immobilization and in a sense the 
slow death of all productive wealth: “If all the men who ever 
lived had had a tomb, it would have been quite necessary, in 
order to find land to cultivate, to overturn these sterile 
monuments, and to stir the ashes of the dead in order to feed the 

living. ”10 

What disappeared, in the course of the eighteenth century, 
was not the inhuman rigor with which madmen were treated, but 
the evident necessity of confinement, the total unity in which 
they were situated without difficulty, and those countless threads 
that wove them into the continuous texture of unreason. 
Madness was set free long before Pinel, not from the material 
constraints which kept it in the dungeon, but from a much more 
binding, perhaps more decisive servitude which kept it under the 
domination of unreasons obscure power. Even before the 
Revolution, madness was free: free for a perception which 
individualized it, free for the recognition of its unique features 
and for all the operations that would finally give it its status as an 
object. 

Left alone, and detached from its former relations, within the 
crumbling walls of confinement, madness was a problem— 
raising questions it had hitherto never formulated. 

Above all, it embarrassed the legislator who, unable to keep 
from sanctioning the end of confinement, no longer knew at 
what point in the social sphere to situate it-prison, hospital, or 
family aid. The measures taken immediately before or after the 
beginning of the Revolution reflect this indecision. 

In his circular on the lettres de cachet , Breteuil asked the 
administrators to indicate the nature of the detention orders in 
the various houses of confinement, and what reasons justified 


245 


them. After a year or two of detention at the most, those men 
were to be set free “who, having done nothing that could expose 
them to the severity of the punishments pronounced by the laws, 
had abandoned themselves to the excesses of libertinage, 
debauchery, and dissipation.” On the other hand, those prisoners 
were to be kept in the houses of confinement “whose minds are 
deranged and whose imbecility makes them incapable of 
conducting themselves in a world where their rages would make 
them dangerous. With respect to these, all that is necessary is to 
ascertain whether their condition is still the same, and 
unfortunately it becomes indispensable to continue their 
detention as long as it is acknowledged that their freedom is 
harmful to society, or a useless benefit to themselves.” This was 
the first stage: to reduce as much as possible the practice of 
confinement with regard to moral transgressions, family 
conflicts, the most benign aspects of libertinage, yet to leave it 
untouched in its principle, and with one of its major meanings 
intact: the internment of the mad. This is the moment when 
madness actually takes possession of confinement, while 
confinement itself is divested of its other forms of utility. 

The second stage was that of the great investigations 
prescribed by the National Assembly and by the Constituent 
Assembly, immediately following the Declaration of the Rights 
of Man: “No man may be arrested or detained except in the cases 
determined by law and according to the forms therein prescribed. 
... The law must permit only the penalties strictly and evidently 
necessary, and no one may be punished under a law established 
and promulgated subsequent to the crime.” The era of 
confinement was over. There remained only an imprisonment 
shared for the moment by condemned or presumed criminals 
and the mad. The Committee on Mendicity of the Constitutent 
Assembly designated five persons to visit the houses of 
confinement in Paris. The Duke de la Rochefoucauld-Liancourt 
presented the report (December 1789); he declared that the 


246 



presence of madmen gave the houses of correction a degrading 
aspect and was likely to reduce the inmates to a status unworthy 
of humanity; the melange tolerated there proved a great frivolity 
on the part of the authorities and the magistrates: ‘‘This 
carelessness is far from the enlightened and scrupulous pity for 
misfortune whereby it receives all possible alleviation and 
consolation in seeking to succor poverty, can one ever 
consent to appear to degrade humanity?” 

If the mad defile those with whom they have been 
imprudently confined, a special internment must be reserved for 
them; a confinement that is not medical, but that ought to be the 
most efficacious and the easiest form of aid: “Of all the 
misfortunes that afflict humanity, the condition of madness is 
still one of those that with most reason call for pity and respect; 
it is for this condition that our attentions must with most reason 
be prodigal; when there is no hope of a cure, how many means 
still remain that can afford these unfortunates at least a tolerable 
existence.” In this text, the status of madness appears in all its 
ambiguity: it is necessary both to protect the confined population 
from its dangers, and to grant it the benefits of a special aid. 

The third stage was the great series of decrees issued between 
the twelfth and the sixteenth of March 1790. In them, the 
Declaration of the Rights of Man received a concrete 
application: “In the space of six weeks, beginning with the 
present decree, all persons detained in fortresses, religious 
houses, houses of correction, police houses, or other prisons 
whatsoever, by lettres de cachet or by order of the agents of the 
executive power, so long as they are not convicted, or under 
arrest, or not charged with major crimes, or confined by reason 
of madness, will be set at liberty.” Confinement is thus 
definitively reserved for certain categories of convicted criminals 
and for madmen. But for the latter, a special arrangement is in 
order: “Persons detained for reasons of dementia will be, for the 
space of three months, starting from the day of publication of the 


247 



present decree, at the suit of our procurators, interrogated by the 
magistrates in the usual manner, and by virtue of their 
disposition visited by physicians who, under the supervision of 
the directors of the district, will pronounce upon the true 
circumstances of the patients in order that, after the sentence 
that will have certified as to their condition, they may be released 
or cared for in hospitals indicated for that purpose.” It appears 
that the choice is henceforth made. On March 29, 1790, Bailly, 
Duport-Dutertre, and a police administrator went to La 
Salpetriere to determine in what manner this decree could be 
carried out; they then made a similar visit to Bicetre. The 
difficulties were numerous; to begin with, there existed no 
hospitals intended or at least reserved for the mad. 

In the face of these material difficulties, to which were added 
certain theoretical uncertainties, a long phase of hesitation was to 
begin. From all sides, the Assembly was asked to provide a text 
which would grant protection from madmen even before the 
promised creation of the hospitals. And by a regression, which 
was to be of great importance for the future, madmen were 
brought under the sway of immediate and unchecked measures 
adopted not even against dangerous criminals, but against 
marauding beasts. The Law of August 16-24, 1790, “entrusts to 
the vigilance and authority of the municipal bodies ... the care of 
obviating and remedying the disagreeable events that may be 
occasioned by madmen set at liberty, and by the wandering of 
vicious and dangerous animals.” The law of July 22, 1791, 
reinforces this arrangement, making families responsible for the 
supervision of the insane, and permitting the municipal 
authorities to take all measures that might prove useful: “The 
relatives of the insane must care for them, prevent them from 
straying, and see that they do not commit offenses or disorders. 
The municipal authority must obviate the inconvenience that 
may result from the negligence with which private persons fulfill 
this duty.” By this detour around their liberation, madmen 


248 



regained, but this time within the law itself, that animal status in 
which confinement had seemed to isolate them; they again 
became wild beasts at the very period when doctors began to 
attribute to them a gentle animality. But even though this legal 
disposition was put in the hands of the authorities, the problems 
were not solved thereby; hospitals for the insane still did not 
exist. 

Countless requests flooded the Ministry of the Interior. 
Delessart answered one of them, for example: “I feel as you do, 
Monsieur, how important it is that we labor without respite 
toward the establishment of houses designed to serve as retreats 
for the unfortunate class of the insane.... With regard to those 
insane persons whom the lack of such an establishment has 
relegated to the various prisons of your department, I do not see 
any other means at present of removing them from those places 
so unsuited to their state, except to transfer them temporarily, if 
possible, to Bicetre. It would therefore be appropriate for the 
Directory to write to the Paris establishment in order to ascertain 
a way to have them admitted to that house, where the costs of 
their upkeep will be paid by your department or by the 
communes where these unfortunates reside, if their families are 
not in a position to assume that expense/’ Bicetre thus became 
the great center to which all the insane were sent, especially once 
Saint-Lazare was closed. The same was true for the women at La 
Salpetriere: in 1792, two hundred madwomen were taken there 
who had been installed five years previously in the former 
novitiate of the Capucines on the Rue Saint-Jacques. But in the 
remote provinces, there was no question of sending the insane to 
the former hopitaux generaux. Generally, they were detained in 
the prisons, as was the case for example at the fortress of Ha, at 
the Chateau of Angers, or at Bellevaux. The disorder in such 
places was indescribable, and continued for a long time—until 
the Empire. Antoine Nodier gives some details about Bellevaux: 
“Every day, the uproar warns the neighborhood that those 


249 



confined are fighting and persecuting one another. The guards 
rush upon them. Constituted as they are today, the prison guards 
are the laughingstock of the combatants. The municipal 
administrators are implored to intervene in order to re-establish 
peace and quiet; their authority is flouted; they are shamed and 
insulted; this is no longer a house of justice and detention.” 

The disorders are as great, greater perhaps, at Bicetre; political 
prisoners are kept there; hunted suspects are hidden there; 
poverty and famine keep many people hungry. The 
administration never ceases to protest; it asks that criminals be 
kept separate; and—it is important to note—some people still 
suggest that, in their place of detention, madmen be confined as 
well. On the ninth Brumaire, Year III, the bursar of Bicetre 
writes to “Citizens Grandpre and Osmond, members of the 
Committee on Administration and Tribunals”: “I submit that at 
a moment when humanity is decidedly the order of the day, 
there is no one who does not experience an impulse of horror 
upon seeing crime and indigence united in the same asylum.” 
Was it necessary to recall the September massacres, the continual 
escapes, and, for so many innocent eyes, the sight of strangled 
prisoners, of swinging chains? The indigent and the old “have 
before their eyes nothing but chains, bars, and bolts. Add to this 
the groans of the prisoners that sometimes reach them.... It is on 
this basis that I urgently ask either that the prisoners be removed 
from Bicetre, leaving only the indigent there, or that the indigent 
be removed, leaving only the prisoners.” And here, finally, is the 
decisive point, if we remember that this letter was written in the 
middle of the Revolution, long before the reports of Georges 
Cabanis, and several months after Pinel, according to tradition, 
had “liberated” the insane of Bicetre: “We could perhaps in this 
latter case leave the madmen there, another class of unfortunates 
who cause horrible suffering to humanity.... Make haste, then, 
citizens who cherish humanity, to realize such a beautiful dream, 
and be persuaded in advance that you will thereupon have 


250 



deserved well of it.” So great was the confusion of those years; so 
difficult was it, at the moment when “humanity” was being re¬ 
evaluated, to determine the place madness was to occupy within 
it; so difficult was it to situate madness in a social sphere that was 
being restructured. 


251 



IX 



252 


THE BIRTH OF 
THE ASYLUM 


WE know the images. They are familiar in all histories of 
psychiatry, where their function is to illustrate that happy age 
when madness was finally recognized and treated according to a 
truth to which we had too long remained blind. 

“The worthy Society of Friends ... sought to assure those of 
its members who might have the misfortune to lose their reason 
without a sufficient fortune to resort to expensive establishments 
all the resources of medicine and all the comforts of life 
compatible with their state; a voluntary subscription furnished 
the funds, and for the last two years, an establishment that seems 
to unite many advantages with all possible economy has been 
founded near the city of York. If the soul momentarily quails at 
the sight of that dread disease which seems created to humiliate 
human reason, it subsequently experiences gentler emotions 
when it considers all that an ingenious benevolence has been able 
to invent for its care and cure. 

“This house is situated a mile from York, in the midst of a 
fertile and smiling countryside; it is not at all the idea of a prison 
that it suggests, but rather that of a large farm; it is surrounded 
by a great, walled garden. No bars, no grilles on the windows.”1 

As for the liberation of the insane at Bicetre, the story is 
famous: the decision to remove the chains from the prisoners in 
the dungeons; Couthon visiting the hospital to find out whether 
any suspects were being hidden; Pinel courageously going to 
meet him, while everyone trembled at the sight of the “invalid 
carried in men’s arms.” The confrontation of the wise, firm 
philanthropist and the paralytic monster. “Pinel immediately led 
him to the section for the deranged, where the sight of the cells 
made a painful impression on him. He asked to interrogate all 


253 


the patients. From most, he received only insults and obscene 
apostrophes. It was useless to prolong the interview. Turning to 
Pinel: ‘Now, citizen, are you mad yourself to seek to unchain 
such beasts?’ Pinel replied calmly: ‘Citizen, I am convinced that 
these madmen are so intractable only because they have been 
deprived of air and liberty.’ 

“ ‘Well, do as you like with them, but I fear you may become 
the victim of your own presumption.’ Whereupon, Couthon was 
taken to his carriage. His departure was a relief; everyone 
breathed again; the great philanthropist immediately set to 
work. ”2 

These are images, at least insofar as each of the stories derives 
the essence of its power from imaginary forms: the patriarchal 
calm of Tuke’s home, where the heart’s passions and the mind’s 
disorders slowly subside; the lucid firmness of Pinel, who masters 
in a word and a gesture the two animal frenzies that roar against 
him as they hunt him down; and the wisdom that could 
distinguish, between the raving madman and the bloodthirsty 
member of the Convention, which was the true danger: images 
that will carry far—to our own day—their weight of legend. 

The legends of Pinel and Tuke transmit mythical values, 
which nineteenth-century psychiatry would accept as obvious in 
nature. But beneath the myths themselves, there was an 
operation, or rather a series of operations, which silently 
organized the world of the asylum, the methods of cure, and at 
the same time the concrete experience of madness. 

Tuke’s gesture, first of all. Because it is contemporary with 
Pinel’s, because he is known to have been borne along by a whole 
current of “philanthropy,” this gesture is regarded as an act of 
“liberation.” The truth was quite different: “... there has also 
been particular occasion to observe the great loss, which 
individuals of our society have sustained, by being put under the 
care of those who are not only strangers to our principles, but by 


254 


whom they are frequently mixed with other patients, who may 
indulge themselves in ill language, and other exceptionable 
practices. This often seems to leave an unprofitable effect upon 
the patients’ minds after they are restored to the use of their 
reason, alienating them from those religious attachments which 
they had before experienced; and sometimes, even corrupting 
them with vicious habits to which they had been strangers. ”5 
The Retreat would serve as an instrument of segregation: a moral 
and religious segregation which sought to reconstruct around 
madness a milieu as much as possible like that of the 
Community of Quakers. And this for two reasons: first, the sight 
of evil is for every sensitive soul the cause of suffering, the origin 
of all those strong and untoward passions such as horror, hate, 
and digust which engender or perpetuate madness: “It was 
thought, very justly, that the indiscriminate mixture, which must 
occur in large public establishments, of persons of opposite 
religious sentiments and practices; of the profligate and the 
virtuous; the profane and the serious; was calculated to check the 
progress of returning reason, and to fix, still deeper, the 
melancholy and misanthropic train of ideas ...”4 But the 
principal reason lies elsewhere: it is that religion can play the 
double role of nature and of rule, since it has assumed the depth 
of nature in ancestral habit, in education, in everyday exercise, 
and since it is at the same time a constant principle of coercion. 
It is both spontaneity and constraint, and to this degree it 
controls the only forces that can, in reason’s eclipse, 
counterbalance the measureless violence of madness; its precepts, 
“where these have been strongly imbued in early life ... become 
little less than principles of our nature; and their restraining 
power is frequently felt, even under the delirious excitement of 
insanity. To encourage the influence of religious principles over 
the mind of the insane is considered of great consequence, as a 
means of cure. ”5 In the dialectic of insanity where reason hides 


255 


without abolishing itself, religion constitutes the concrete form 
of what cannot go mad; it bears what is invincible in reason, it 
bears what subsists beneath madness as quasi-nature and around 
it as the constant solicitation of a milieu “where, during lucid 
intervals, or the state of convalescence, the patient might enjoy 
the society of those who were of similar habits and opinions.” 
Religion safeguards the old secret of reason in the presence of 
madness, thus making closer, more immediate, the constraint 
that was already rampant in classical confinement. There, the 
religious and moral milieu was imposed from without, in such a 
way that madness was controlled, not cured. At the Retreat, 
religion was part of the movement which indicated in spite of 
everything the presence of reason in madness, and which led 
from insanity to health. Religious segregation has a very precise 
meaning: it does not attempt to preserve the sufferers from the 
profane presence of non-Quakers, but to place the insane 
individual within a moral element where he will be in debate 
with himself and his surroundings: to constitute for him a milieu 
where, far from being protected, he will be kept in a perpetual 
anxiety, ceaselessly threatened by Law and Transgression. 

“The principle of fear, which is rarely decreased by insanity, is 
considered as of great importance in the management of the 

patients.” 3 Fear appears as an essential presence in the asylum. 
Already an ancient figure, no doubt, if we think of the terrors of 
confinement. But these terrors surrounded madness from the 
outside, marking the boundary of reason and unreason, and 
enjoying a double power: over the violence of fury in order to 
contain it, and over reason itself to hold it at a distance; such fear 
was entirely on the surface. The fear instituted at the Retreat is 
of great depth; it passes between reason and madness like a 
mediation, like an evocation of a common nature they still share, 
and by which it could link them together. The terror that once 
reigned was the most visible sign of the alienation of madness in 


256 


the classical period; fear was now endowed with a power of 
disalienation, which permitted it to restore a primitive complicity 
between the madman and the man of reason. It re-established a 
solidarity between them. Now madness would never—could 
never—cause fear again; it would be afraid , without recourse or 
return, thus entirely in the hands of the pedagogy of good sense, 
of truth, and of morality. 

Samuel Tuke tells how he received at the Retreat a maniac, 
young and prodigiously strong, whose seizures caused panic in 
those around him and even among his guards. When he entered 
the Retreat he was loaded with chains; he wore handcuffs; his 
clothes were attached by ropes. He had no sooner arrived than all 
his shackles were removed, and he was permitted to dine with 
the keepers; his agitation immediately ceased; “his attention 
appeared to be arrested by his new situation.” He was taken to 
his room; the keeper explained that the entire house was 
organized in terms of the greatest liberty and the greatest 
comfort for all, and that he would not be subject to any 
constraint so long as he did nothing against the rules of the 
house or the general principles of human morality. For his part, 
the keeper declared he had no desire to use the means of 
coercion at his disposal. “The maniac was sensible of the 
kindness of his treatment. He promised to restrain himself '” He 
sometimes still raged, shouted, and frightened his companions. 
The keeper reminded him of the threats and promises of the first 
day; if he did not control himself, it would be necessary to go 
back to the old ways. The patient’s agitation would then increase 
for a while, and then rapidly decline. “He would listen with 
attention to the persuasions and arguments of his friendly visitor. 
After such conversations, the patient was generally better for 
some days or a week.” At the end of four months, he left the 
Retreat, entirely cured. Here fear is addressed to the invalid 
directly, not by instruments but in speech; there is no question of 
limiting a liberty that rages beyond its bounds, but of marking 


257 



out and glorifying a region of simple responsibility where any 
manifestation of madness will be linked to punishment. The 
obscure guilt that once linked transgression and unreason is thus 
shifted; the madman, as a human being originally endowed with 
reason, is no longer guilty of being mad; but the madman, as a 
madman, and in the interior of that disease of which he is no 
longer guilty, must feel morally responsible for everything within 
him that may disturb morality and society, and must hold no one 
but himself responsible for the punishment he receives. The 
assignation of guilt is no longer the mode of relation that obtains 
between the madman and the sane man in their generality; it 
becomes both the concrete form of coexistence of each madman 
with his keeper, and the form of awareness that the madman 
must have of his own madness. 

We must therefore re-evaluate the meanings assigned to 
Tuke’s work: liberation of the insane, abolition of constraint, 
constitution of a human milieu—these are only justifications. 
The real operations were different. In fact Tuke created an 
asylum where he substituted for the free terror of madness the 
stifling anguish of responsibility; fear no longer reigned on the 
other side of the prison gates, it now raged under the seals of 
conscience. Tuke now transferred the age-old terrors in which 
the insane had been trapped to the very heart of madness. The 
asylum no longer punished the madman’s guilt, it is true; but it 
did more, it organized that guilt; it organized it for the madman 
as a consciousness of himself, and as a non-reciprocal relation to 
the keeper; it organized it for the man of reason as an awareness 
of the Other, a therapeutic intervention in the madman’s 
existence. In other words, by this guilt the madman became an 
object of punishment always vulnerable to himself and to the 
Other; and, from the acknowledgment of his status as object, 
from the awareness of his guilt, the madman was to return to his 
awareness of himself as a free and responsible subject, and 
consequently to reason. This movement by which, objectifying 


258 



himself for the Other, the madman thus returned to his liberty, 
was to be found as much in Work as in Observation. 

Let us not forget that we are in a Quaker world where God 
blesses men in the signs of their prosperity. Work comes first in 
“moral treatment” as practiced at the Retreat. In itself, work 
possesses a constraining power superior to all forms of physical 
coercion, in that the regularity of the hours, the requirements of 
attention, the obligation to produce a result detach the sufferer 
from a liberty of mind that would be fatal and engage him in a 
system of responsibilities: “Regular employment is perhaps the 
most generally efficacious; and those kinds of employment are 
doubtless to be preferred, both on a moral and physical account, 
which are accompanied by considerable bodily action; that are 
most agreeable to the patient and which are most opposite to the 
illusions of his disease.”7 Through work, man returns to the 
order of God’s commandments; he submits his liberty to laws 
that are those of both morality and reality. Hence mental work is 
not to be rejected; yet with absolute rigor, all exercises of the 
imagination must be excluded as being in complicity with the 
passions, the desires, or all delirious illusions. On the contrary, 
the study of what is eternal in nature and most in accord with the 
wisdom and goodness of Providence has the greatest efficacity in 
reducing the madman’s immoderate liberties and bringing him to 
discover the forms of his responsibility. “The various branches of 
the mathematics and natural science furnish the most useful class 
of subjects on which to employ the minds of the insane.” In the 
asylum, work is deprived of any productive value; it is imposed 
only as a moral rule; a limitation of liberty, a submission to order, 
an engagement of responsibility, with the single aim of 
disalienating the mind lost in the excess of a liberty which 
physical constraint limits only in appearance. 

Even more efficacious than work, than the observation of 
others, is what Tuke calls “the need for esteem”: “This principle 


259 


in the human mind, which doubtless influences in a great degree, 
though often secretly, our general manners; and which operates 
with peculiar force on our introduction into a new circle of 
acquaintance.” In classical confinement, the madman was also 
vulnerable to observation, but such observation did not, basically, 
involve him; it involved only his monstrous surface, his visible 
animality; and it included at least one form of reciprocity, since 
the sane man could read in the madman, as in a mirror, the 
imminent movement of his downfall. The observation Tuke now 
instituted as one of the great elements of asylum existence was 
both deeper and less reciprocal. It pursued in the madman the 
least perceptible signs of his madness, in the place where 
madness becomes secretly distinct from reason, begins to detach 
itself from it; and the madman cannot return this observation in 
any form, since he is merely observed; he is a kind of new arrival, 
a latecomer in the world of reason. Tuke organized an entire 
ceremonial around these observations. There were social 
occasions in the English manner, where everyone was obliged to 
imitate all the formal requirements of social existence; nothing 
else circulated except the observation that would spy out any 
incongruity, any disorder, any awkwardness where madness 
might betray itself. The directors and staff of the Retreat thus 
regularly invited several patients to “tea-parties”; the guests 
“dress in their best clothes, and vie with each other in politeness 
and propriety. The best fare is provided, and the visitors are 
treated with all the attention of strangers. The evening generally 
passes with the greatest harmony and enjoyment. It rarely 
happens that any unpleasant circumstance occurs; the patients 
control, to a wonderful degree, their different propensities; and 
the scene is at once curious and affectingly gratifying.” Curiously, 
this rite is not one of intimacy, of dialogue, of mutual 
acquaintance; it is the organization around the madman of a 
world where everything would be like and near him, but in 
which he himself would remain a stranger, the Stranger par 


260 



excellence who is judged not only by appearances but by all that 
they may betray and reveal in spite of themselves. Incessantly cast 
in this empty role of unknown visitor, and challenged in 
everything that can be known about him, drawn to the surface of 
himself by a social personality silently imposed by observation, by 
form and mask, the madman is obliged to objectify himself in 
the eyes of reason as the perfect stranger, that is, as the man 
whose strangeness does not reveal itself. The city of reason 
welcomes him only with this qualification and at the price of this 
surrender to anonymity. 

We see that at the Retreat the partial suppression of physical 
constraint was part of a system whose essential element was the 
constitution of a “self-restraint” in which the patient’s freedom, 
engaged by work and the observation of others, was ceaselessly 
threatened by the recognition of guilt. Instead of submitting to a 
simple negative operation that loosened bonds and delivered 
one’s deepest nature from madness, it must be recognized that 
one was in the grip of a positive operation that confined madness 
in a system of rewards and punishments, and included it in the 
movement of moral consciousness. A passage from a world of 
Censure to a universe of Judgment. But thereby a psychology of 
madness becomes possible, for under observation madness is 
constantly required, at the surface of itself, to deny its 
dissimulation. It is judged only by its acts; it is not accused of 
intentions, nor are its secrets to be fathomed. Madness is 
responsible only for that part of itself which is visible. All the rest 
is reduced to silence. Madness no longer exists except as seen. 
The proximity instituted by the asylum, an intimacy neither 
chains nor bars would ever violate again, does not allow 
reciprocity: only the nearness of observation that watches, that 
spies, that comes closer in order to see better, but moves ever 
farther away, since it accepts and acknowledges only the values of 
the Stranger. The science of mental disease, as it would develop 
in the asylum, would always be only of the order of observation 


261 



and classification. It would not be a dialogue. It could not be that 
until psychoanalysis had exorcised this phenomenon of 
observation, essential to the nineteenth-century asylum, and 
substituted for its silent magic the powers of language, It would 
be fairer to say that psychoanalysis doubled the absolute 
observation of the watcher with the endless monologue of the 
person watched—thus preserving the old asylum structure of 
non-reciprocal observation but balancing it, in a non- 
symmetrical reciprocity, by the new structure of language 
without response. 

Surveillance and Judgment: already the outline appears of a 
new personage who will be essential in the nineteenth-century 
asylum. Tuke himself suggests this personage, when he tells the 
story of a maniac subject to seizures of irrepressible violence. 
One day while he was walking in the garden of the asylum with 
the keeper, this patient suddenly entered a phase of excitation, 
moved several steps away, picked up a large stone, and made the 
gesture of throwing it at his companion. The keeper stopped, 
looked the patient in the eyes; then advanced several steps 
toward him and “in a resolute tone of voice ... commanded him 
to lay down the stone”; as he approached, the patient lowered his 
hand, then dropped his weapon; “he then submitted to be quietly 
led to his apartment.” Something had been born, which was no 
longer repression, but authority. Until the end of the eighteenth 
century, the world of madmen was peopled only by the abstract, 
faceless power which kept them confined; within these limits, it 
was empty, empty of all that was not madness itself; the guards 
were often recruited among the inmates themselves. Tuke 
established, on the contrary, a mediating element between guards 
and patients, between reason and madness. The space reserved 
by society for insanity would now be haunted by those who were 
“from the other side” and who represented both the prestige of 
the authority that confines and the rigor of the reason that 
judges. The keeper intervenes, without weapons, without 


262 



instruments of constraint, with observation and language only; 
he advances upon madness, deprived of all that could protect 
him or make him seem threatening, risking an immediate 
confrontation without recourse. In fact, though, it is not as a 
concrete person that he confronts madness, but as a reasonable 
being, invested by that very fact, and before any combat takes 
place, with the authority that is his for not being mad. Reason's 
victory over unreason was once assured only by material force, 
and in a sort of real combat. Now the combat was always decided 
beforehand, unreason's defeat inscribed in advance in the 
concrete situation where madman and man of reason meet. The 
absence of constraint in the nineteenth-century asylum is not 
unreason liberated, but madness long since mastered. 

For this new reason which reigns in the asylum, madness does 
not represent the absolute form of contradiction, but instead a 
minority status, an aspect of itself that does not have the right to 
autonomy, and can live only grafted onto the world of reason. 
Madness is childhood. Everything at the Retreat is organized so 
that the insane are transformed into minors. They are regarded 
“as children who have an overabundance of strength and make 
dangerous use of it. They must be given immediate punishments 
and rewards; whatever is remote has no effect on them. A new 
system of education must be applied, a new direction given to 
their ideas; they must first be subjugated, then encouraged, then 
applied to work, and this work made agreeable by attractive 
means."8 For a long time already, the law had regarded the 
insane as minors, but this was a juridical situation, abstractly 
defined by interdiction and trusteeship; it was not a concrete 
mode of relation between man and man. Minority status became 
for Tuke a style of existence to be applied to the mad, and for the 
guards a mode of sovereignty. Great emphasis was placed on the 
concept of the “family” which organized the community of the 
insane and their keepers at the Retreat. Apparently this “family” 


263 


placed the patient in a milieu both normal and natural; in reality 
it alienated him still more: the juridical minority assigned to the 
madman was intended to protect him as a subject of law; this 
ancient structure, by becoming a form of coexistence, delivered 
him entirely, as a psychological subject, to the authority and 
prestige of the man of reason, who assumed for him the concrete 
figure of an adult, in other words, both domination and 
destination. 

In the great reorganization of relations between madness and 
reason, the family, at the end of the eighteenth century, played a 
decisive part—simultaneously imaginary landscape and real social 
structure; it is from the family that Tuke starts out, and toward it 
that he progresses. Lending it the prestige of primitive values not 
yet compromised in the social, Tuke makes the family play a role 
of disalienation; it was, in his myth, the antithesis of that 
“milieu” which the eighteenth century saw as the origin of all 
madness. But he introduced it as well, in a very real way, into the 
world of the asylum, where it appears both as truth and as norm 
for all relations that may obtain between the madman and the 
man of reason. Thus minority under family tutelage, a juridical 
status in which the madman’s civil status is alienated, becomes a 
concrete situation in which his concrete liberty is alienated. The 
entire existence of madness, in the world now being prepared for 
it, was enveloped in what we may call, in anticipation, a “parental 
complex.” The prestige of patriarchy is revived around madness 
in the bourgeois family. It is this historical sedimentation which 
psychoanalysis would later bring to light, according it through a 
new myth the meaning of a destiny that supposedly marked all of 
Western culture and perhaps all civilization, whereas it had been 
slowly deposited by it and only solidified quite recently at the 
turn of this century, when madness was doubly alienated within 
the family—by the myth of a disalienation in patriarchal purity, 
and by a truly alienating situation in an asylum constituted in the 
family mode. Henceforth, and for a period of time the end of 


264 



which it is not yet possible to predict, the discourse of unreason 
will be indissociably linked with the half-real, half-imaginary 
dialectic of the Family. So that what, in their violence, it was 
once obligatory to interpret as profanations or blasphemies, it 
would henceforth be necessary to see as an incessant attack 
against the Father. Thus in the modern world, what had been 
the great, irreparable confrontation of reason and unreason 
became the secret thrust of instincts against the solidity of the 
family institution and against its most archaic symbols. 

There is an astonishing convergence of the movement of 
fundamental institutions and this evolution of madness in the 
world of confinement. The liberal economy, as we have seen, 
tended to entrust the care of the poor and the sick to the family 
rather than to the State: the family thus became the site of social 
responsibility. But if the patient can be entrusted to the family, 
he is nonetheless mad, which is too strange and inhuman. Tuke, 
precisely, reconstitutes around madness a simulated family, 
which is an institutional parody but a real psychological 
situation. Where the family is inadequate, he substitutes for it a 
fictitious family decor of signs and attitudes. But by a very 
curious intersection, the day would come when the family was 
relieved of its responsibility to care for the patient in general, 
while it kept the fictitious values that concern madness; and long 
after the diseases of the poor had again become an affair of state, 
the asylum would keep the insane in the imperative fiction of the 
family; the madman remains a minor, and for a long time reason 
will retain for him the aspect of the Father. 

Closed upon these fictitious values, the asylum was protected 
from history and from social evolution. In Tuke’s mind, the 
problem was to constitute a milieu which would imitate the 
oldest, the purest, the most natural forms of coexistence: the 
most human milieu possible, while being the least social one 
possible. In fact, he isolated the social structure of the bourgeois 
family, reconstituted it symbolically in the asylum, and set it 


265 



adrift in history. The asylum, always oriented to anachronistic 
structures and symbols, would be, par excellence , inadapted and 
out of time. And exactly where animality manifested a presence 
without history, an eternal return, would slowly reappear the 
immemorial scars of old hatreds, old family profanations, the 
forgotten signs of incest and punishment. 

Pinel advocates no religious segregation. Or rather, a 
segregation that functions in the opposite direction from that 
practiced by Tuke. The benefits of the renovated asylum were 
offered to all, or almost all, except the fanatics “who believe 
themselves inspired and seek to make converts.” Bicetre and La 
Salpetriere, according to Pinefs intention, form a complementary 
figure to the Retreat. 

Religion must not be the moral substratum of life in the 
asylum, but purely and simply a medical object: “Religious 
opinions in a hospital for the insane must be considered only in a 
strictly medical relation, that is, one must set aside all other 
considerations of public worship and political belief, and 
investigate only whether it is necessary to oppose the exaltation 
of ideas and feelings that may originate in this source, in order to 
effect the cure of certain alienated minds.”9 A source of strong 
emotions and terrifying images which it arouses through fears of 
the Beyond, Catholicism frequently provokes madness; it 
generates delirious beliefs, entertains hallucinations, leads men to 
despair and to melancholia. We must not be surprised if, 
“examining the registers of the insane asylum at Bicetre, we find 
inscribed there many priests and monks, as well as country 
people maddened by a frightening picture of the future.” Still less 
surprising is it to see the number of religious madnesses vary. 
Under the Old Regime and during the Revolution, the strength 
of superstitious beliefs, or the violence of the struggles in which 
the Republic opposed the Catholic Church, multiplied 
melancholias of religious origin. With the return of peace, the 


266 


Concordat having erased the struggles, these forms of delirium 
disappeared; in the Year X, 50 per cent of the melancholics in 
Bicetre were suffering from religious madness, 33 per cent the 
following year, and only 18 per cent in the Year XII. The asylum 
must thus be freed from religion and from all its iconographic 
connections; “melancholics by devotion” must not be allowed 
their pious books; experience “teaches that this is the surest 
means of perpetuating insanity or even of making it incurable, 
and the more such permission is granted, the less we manage to 
calm anxiety and scruples.” Nothing takes us further from Tuke 
and his dreams of a religious community that would at the same 
time be a privileged site of mental cures, than this notion of a 
neutralized asylum, purified of those images and passions to 
which Christianity gave birth and which made the mind wander 
toward illusion, toward error, and soon toward delirium and 
hallucinations. 

But Pinefs problem was to reduce the iconographic forms, not 
the moral content of religion. Once “filtered,” religion possesses 
a disalienating power that dissipates the images, calms the 
passions, and restores man to what is most immediate and 
essential: it can bring him closer to his moral truth. And it is 
here that religion is often capable of effecting cures. Pinel relates 
several Voltairean stories. One, for example, of a woman of 
twenty-five, “of strong constitution, united in wedlock to a weak 
and delicate man”; she suffered “quite violent fits of hysteria, 
imagining she was possessed by a demon who followed her in 
different shapes, sometimes emitting bird noises, sometimes 
mournful sounds and piercing cries.” Happily, the local cure was 
more concerned with natural religion than learned in the 
techniques of exorcism; he believed in curing through the 
benevolence of nature; this “enlightened man, of kindly and 
persuasive character, gained ascendancy over the patient’s mind 
and managed to induce her to leave her bed, to resume her 
domestic tasks, and even to spade her garden.... This was 


267 



followed by the most fortunate effects, and by a cure that lasted 
three years.” Restored to the extreme simplicity of this moral 
content, religion could not help conniving with philosophy and 
with medicine, with all the forms of wisdom and science that can 
restore the reason in a disturbed mind. There are even instances 
of religion serving as a preliminary treatment, preparing for what 
will be done in the asylum: take the case of the young girl “of an 
ardent temperament, though very docile and pious” who was 
torn between “the inclinations of her heart and the severe 
principles of her conduct”; her confessor, after having vainly 
counseled her to attach herself to God, proposed examples of a 
firm and measured holiness, and “offered her the best remedy 
against high passions: patience and time.” Taken to La 
Salpetriere, she was treated, on Pinefs orders, “according to the 
same moral principles,” and her illness proved “of very short 
duration.” Thus the asylum assimilates not the social theme of a 
religion in which men feel themselves brothers in the same 
communion and the same community, but the moral power of 
consolation, of confidence, and a docile fidelity to nature. It must 
resume the moral enterprise of religion, exclusive of its fantastic 
text, exclusively on the level of virtue, labor, and social life. 

The asylum is a religious domain without religion, a domain 
of pure morality, of ethical uniformity. Everything that might 
retain the signs of the old differences was eliminated. The last 
vestiges of rite were extinguished. Formerly the house of 
confinement had inherited, in the social sphere, the almost 
absolute limits of the lazar house; it was a foreign country. Now 
the asylum must represent the great continuity of social morality. 
The values of family and work, all the acknowledged virtues, 
now reign in the asylum. But their reign is a double one. First, 
they prevail in fact, at the heart of madness itself; beneath the 
violence and disorder of insanity, the solid nature of the essential 
virtues is not disrupted. There is a primitive morality which is 
ordinarily not affected even by the worst dementia; it is this 


268 



morality which both appears and functions in the cure: “I can 
generally testify to the pure virtues and severe principles often 
manifested by the cure. Nowhere except in novels have I seen 
spouses more worthy of being cherished, parents more tender, 
lovers more passionate, or persons more attached to their duties 
than the majority of the insane fortunately brought to the period 
of convalescence.”10 This inalienable virtue is both the truth and 
the resolution of madness. Which is why, if it reigns, it must 
reign as well. The asylum reduces differences, represses vice, 
eliminates irregularities. It denounces everything that opposes 
the essential virtues of society: celibacy—“the number of girls 
fallen into idiocy is seven times greater than the number of 
married women for the Year XI and the Year XIII; for dementia, 
the proportion is two to four times greater; we can thus deduce 
that marriage constitutes for women a kind of preservative 
against the two sorts of insanity which are most inveterate and 
most often incurable”; debauchery, misconduct, and “extreme 
perversity of habits”—“vicious habits such as drunkenness, 
limitless promiscuity, an apathetic lack of concern can gradually 
degrade the reason and end in outright insanity”; laziness—“it is 
the most constant and unanimous result of experience that in all 
public asylums, as in prisons and hospitals, the surest and 
perhaps the sole guarantee of the maintenance of health and 
good habits and order is the law of rigorously executed 
mechanical work.” The asylum sets itself the task of the 
homogeneous rule of morality, its rigorous extension to all those 
who tend to escape from it. 

But it thereby generates an indifference; if the law does not 
reign universally, it is because there are men who do not 
recognize it, a class of society that lives in disorder, in negligence, 
and almost in illegality: “If on the one hand we see families 
prosper for a long series of years in the bosom of harmony and 
order and concord, how many others, especially in the lower 


269 


classes, afflict the eye with a repulsive spectacle of debauchery, of 
dissensions, and shameful distress! That, according to my daily 
notes, is the most fertile source of the insanity we treat in the 

hospitals.’T1 

In one and the same movement, the asylum becomes, in 
Pinel’s hands, an instrument of moral uniformity and of social 
denunciation. The problem is to impose, in a universal form, a 
morality that will prevail from within upon those who are 
strangers to it and in whom insanity is already present before it 
has made itself manifest. In the first case, the asylum must act as 
an awakening and a reminder, invoking a forgotten nature; in the 
second, it must act by means of a social shift in order to snatch 
the individual from his condition. The operation as practiced at 
the Retreat was still simple: religious segregation for purposes of 
moral purification. The operation as practiced by Pinel was 
relatively complex: to effect moral syntheses, assuring an ethical 
continuity between the world of madness and the world of 
reason, but by practicing a social segregation that would 
guarantee bourgeois morality a universality of fact and permit it 
to be imposed as a law upon all forms of insanity. 

In the classical period, indigence, laziness, vice, and madness 
mingled in an equal guilt within unreason; madmen were caught 
in the great confinement of poverty and unemployment, but all 
had been promoted, in the proximity of transgression, to the 
essence of a Fall. Now madness belonged to social failure, which 
appeared without distinction as its cause, model, and limit. Half 
a century later, mental disease would become degeneracy. 
Henceforth, the essential madness, and the really dangerous one, 
was that which rose from the lower depths of society. 

Pinefs asylum would never be, as a retreat from the world, a 
space of nature and immediate truth like Tuke’s, but a uniform 
domain of legislation, a site of moral syntheses where insanities 
born on the outer limits of society were eliminated. The entire 


270 


life of the inmates, the entire conduct of their keepers and 
doctors, were organized by Pinel so that these moral syntheses 
would function. And this by three principal means: 

1. Silence. The fifth chained prisoner released by Pinel was a 
former ecclesiastic whose madness had caused him to be 
excommunicated; suffering from delusions of grandeur, he 
believed he was Christ; this was “the height of human arrogance 
in delirium.” Sent to Bicetre in 1782, he had been in chains for 
twelve years. For the pride of his bearing, the grandiloquence of 
his ideas, he was one of the most celebrated spectacles of the 
entire hospital, but as he knew that he was reliving Christ’s 
Passion, “he endured with patience this long martyrdom and the 
continual sarcasms his mania exposed him to.” Pinel chose him 
as one of the first twelve to be released, though his delirium was 
still acute. But Pinel did not treat him as he did the others; 
without a word, he had his chains struck off, and “ordered 
expressly that everyone imitate his own reserve and not address a 
word to this poor madman. This prohibition, which was 
rigorously observed, produced upon this self-intoxicated creature 
an effect much more perceptible than irons and the dungeon; he 
felt humiliated in an abandon and an isolation so new to him 
amid his freedom. Finally, after long hesitations, they saw him 
come of his own accord to join the society of the other patients; 
henceforth, he returned to more sensible and true ideas.”12 

Deliverance here has a paradoxical meaning. The dungeon, 
the chains, the continual spectacle, the sarcasms were, to the 
sufferer in his delirium, the very element of his liberty. 
Acknowledged in that very fact and fascinated from without by 
so much complicity, he could not be dislodged from his 
immediate truth. But the chains that fell, the indifference and 
silence of all those around him confined him in the limited use of 
an empty liberty; he was delivered in silence to a truth which was 
not acknowledged and which he would demonstrate in vain, 


271 


since he was no longer a spectacle, and from which he could 
derive no exaltation, since he was not even humiliated. It was the 
man himself, not his projection in a delirium, who was now 
humiliated: for physical constraint yielded to a liberty that 
constantly touched the limits of solitude; the dialogue of 
delirium and insult gave way to a monologue in a language which 
exhausted itself in the silence of others; the entire show of 
presumption and outrage was replaced by indifference. 
Henceforth, more genuinely confined than he could have been in 
a dungeon and chains, a prisoner of nothing but himself, the 
sufferer was caught in a relation to himself that was of the order 
of transgression, and in a non-relation to others that was of the 
order of shame. The others are made innocent, they are no 
longer persecutors; the guilt is shifted inside, showing the 
madman that he was fascinated by nothing but his own 
presumption; the enemy faces disappear; he no longer feels their 
presence as observation, but as a denial of attention, as 
observation deflected; the others are now nothing but a limit that 
ceaselessly recedes as he advances. Delivered from his chains, he 
is now chained, by silence, to transgression and to shame. He 
feels himself punished, and he sees the sign of his innocence in 
that fact; free from all physical punishment, he must prove 
himself guilty. His torment was his glory; his deliverance must 
humiliate him. 

Compared to the incessant dialogue of reason and madness 
during the Renaissance, classical internment had been a 
silencing. But it was not total: language was engaged in things 
rather than really suppressed. Confinement, prisons, dungeons, 
even tortures, engaged in a mute dialogue between reason and 
unreason—the dialogue of struggle. This dialogue itself was now 
disengaged; silence was absolute; there was no longer any 
common language between madness and reason; the language of 
delirium can be answered only by an absence of language, for 
delirium is not a fragment of dialogue with reason, it is not 


272 



language at all; it refers, in an ultimately silent awareness, only to 
transgression. And it is only at this point that a common 
language becomes possible again, insofar as it will be one of 
acknowledged guilt. ‘‘Finally, after long hesitations, they saw him 
come of his own accord to join the society of the other 
patients ...” The absence of language, as a fundamental structure 
of asylum life, has its correlative in the exposure of confession. 
When Freud, in psychoanalysis, cautiously reinstitutes exchange, 
or rather begins once again to listen to this language, henceforth 
eroded into monologue, should we be astonished that the 
formulations he hears are always those of transgression? In this 
inveterate silence, transgression has taken over the very sources 
of speech. 

2. Recognition by Mirror. At the Retreat, the madman was 
observed, and knew he was observed; but except for that direct 
observation which permitted only an indirect apprehension of 
itself, madness had no immediate grasp of its own character. 
With Pinel, on the contrary, observation operated only within 
the space defined by madness, without surface or exterior limits. 
Madness would see itself, would be seen by itself—pure spectacle 
and absolute subject. 

“Three insane persons, each of whom believed himself to be a 
king, and each of whom took the title Louis XVI, quarreled one 
day over the prerogatives of royalty, and defended them 
somewhat too energetically. The keeper approached one of them, 
and drawing him aside, asked: ‘Why do you argue with these 
men who are evidently mad? Doesn’t everyone know that you 
should be recognized as Louis XVI?’ Flattered by this homage, 
the madman immediately withdrew, glancing at the others with 
a disdainful hauteur. The same trick worked with the second 
patient. And thus in an instant there no longer remained any 
trace of an argument.”13 This is the first phase, that of 
exaltation. Madness is made to observe itself, but in others: it 


273 


appears in them as a baseless pretense—in other words, as 
absurd. However, in this observation that condemns others, the 
madman assures his own justification and the certainty of being 
adequate to his delirium. The rift between presumption and 
reality allows itself to be recognized only in the object. It is 
entirely masked, on the contrary, in the subject, which becomes 
immediate truth and absolute judge: the exalted sovereignty that 
denounces the others’ false sovereignty dispossesses them and 
thus confirms itself in the unfailing plenitude of presumption. 
Madness, as simple delirium, is projected onto others; as perfect 
unconsciousness, it is entirely accepted. 

It is at this point that the mirror, as an accomplice, becomes 
an agent of demystification. Another inmate of Bicetre, also 
believing himself a king, always expressed himself “in a tone of 
command and with supreme authority.” One day when he was 
calmer, the keeper approached him and asked why, if he were a 
sovereign, he did not put an end to his detention, and why he 
remained mingled with madmen of all kinds. Resuming this 
speech the following days, “he made him see, little by little, the 
absurdity of his pretensions, showed him another madman who 
had also been long convinced that he possessed supreme power 
and had become an object of mockery. At first the maniac felt 
shaken, soon he cast doubts upon his title of sovereign, and 
finally he came to realize his chimerical vagaries. It was in two 
weeks that this unexpected moral revolution took place, and after 
several months of tests, this worthy father was restored to his 
family.”14 This, then, is the ph ase of abasement: presumptuously 
identified with the object of his delirium, the madman 
recognizes himself as in a mirror in this madness whose absurd 
pretensions he has denounced; his solid sovereignty as a subject 
dissolves in this object he has demystified by accepting it. He is 
now pitilessly observed by himself. And in the silence of those 
who represent reason, and who have done nothing but hold up 


274 



the perilous mirror, he recognizes himself as objectively mad. 

We have seen by what means—and by what mystifications— 
eighteenth-century therapeutics tried to persuade the madman of 
his madness in order to release him from it. Here the movement 
is of an entirely different nature; it is not a question of 
dissipating error by the impressive spectacle of a truth, even a 
pretended truth; but of treating madness in its arrogance rather 
than in its aberration. The classical mind condemned in madness 
a certain blindness to the truth; from Pinel on, madness would 
be regarded rather as an impulse from the depths which exceeds 
the juridical limits of the individual, ignores the moral limits 
fixed for him, and tends to an apotheosis of the self. For the 
nineteenth century, the initial model of madness would be to 
believe oneself to be God, while for the preceding centuries it 
had been to deny God. Thus madness, in the spectacle of itself as 
unreason humiliated, was able to find its salvation when, 
imprisoned in the absolute subjectivity of its delirium, it 
surprised the absurd and objective image of that delirium in the 
identical madman. Truth insinuated itself, as if by surprise (and 
not by violence, in the eighteenth-century mode), in this play of 
reciprocal observations where it never saw anything but itself. 
But the asylum, in this community of madmen, placed the 
mirrors in such a way that the madman, when ail was said and 
done, inevitably surprised himself, despite himself, as a madman. 
Freed from the chains that made it a purely observed object, 
madness lost, paradoxically, the essence of its liberty, which was 
solitary exaltation; it became responsible for what it knew of its 
truth; it imprisoned itself in an infinitely self-referring 
observation; it was finally chained to the humiliation of being its 
own object. Awareness was now linked to the shame of being 
identical to that other, of being compromised in him, and of 
already despising oneself before being able to recognize or to 
know oneself. 

3. Perpetual Judgment. By this play of mirrors, as by silence, 


275 



madness is ceaselessly called upon to judge itself. But beyond 
this, it is at every moment judged from without; judged not by 
moral or scientific conscience, but by a sort of invisible tribunal 
in permanent session. The asylum Pinel dreamed of and partly 
realized at Bicetre, but especially at La Salpetriere, is a juridical 
microcosm. To be efficacious, this judgment must be 
redoubtable in aspect; all the iconographic apanage of the judge 
and the executioner must be present in the mind of the madman, 
so that he understands what universe of judgment he now 
belongs to. The decor of justice, in all its terror and 
implacability, will thus be part of the treatment. One of the 
inmates at Bicetre suffered from a religious delirium animated by 
a fear of hell; he believed that the only way he could escape 
eternal damnation was by rigorous abstinence. It was necessary to 
compensate this fear of a remote justice by the presence of a 
more immediate and still more redoubtable one: “Could the 
irresistible curse of his sinister ideas be counterbalanced other 
than by the impression of a strong and deep fear?” One evening, 
the director came to the patient’s door “with matter likely to 
produce fear—an angry eye, a thundering tone of voice, a group 
of the staff armed with strong chains that they shook noisily. 
They set some soup beside the madman and gave him precise 
orders to eat it during the night, or else suffer the most cruel 
treatment. They retired, and left the madman in the most 
distressed state of indecision between the punishment with 
which he was threatened and the frightening prospect of the 
torments in the life to come. After an inner combat of several 
hours, the former idea prevailed, and he decided to take some 
nourishment. ”15 

The asylum as a juridical instance recognized no other. It 
judged immediately, and without appeal. It possessed its own 
instruments of punishment, and used them as it saw fit. The old 
confinement had generally been practiced outside of normal 


276 


juridical forms, but it imitated the punishment of criminals, 
using the same prisons, the same dungeons, the same physical 
brutality. The justice that reigned in Pinefs asylum did not 
borrow its modes of repression from the other justice, but 
invented its own. Or rather, it used the therapeutic methods that 
had become known in the eighteenth century, but used them as 
chastisements. And this is not the least of the paradoxes of 
Pinefs “philanthropic” and “liberating” enterprise, this 
conversion of medicine into justice, of therapeutics into 
repression. In the medicine of the classical period, baths and 
showers were used as remedies as a result of the physicians’ 
vagaries about the nature of the nervous system: the intention 
was to refresh the organism, to relax the desiccated fibers; it is 
true that they also added, among the happy consequences of the 
cold shower, the psychological effect of the unpleasant surprise 
which interrupted the course of ideas and changed the nature of 
sentiments; but we were still in the landscape of medical 
speculation. With Pinel, the use of the shower became frankly 
juridical; the shower was the habitual punishment of the ordinary 
police tribunal that sat permanently at the asylum: “Considered 
as a means of repression, it often suffices to subject to the general 
law of manual labor a madman who is susceptible to it, in order 
to conquer an obstinate refusal to take nourishment, and to 
subjugate insane persons carried away by a sort of turbulent and 
reasoned humor.” 

Everything was organized so that the madman would 
recognize himself in a world of judgment that enveloped him on 
all sides; he must know that he is watched, judged, and 
condemned; from transgression to punishment, the connection 
must be evident, as a guilt recognized by all: “We profit from the 
circumstance of the bath, remind him of the transgression, or of 
the omission of an important duty, and with the aid of a faucet 
suddenly release a shower of cold water upon his head, which 
often disconcerts the madman or drives out a predominant idea 


277 



by a strong and unexpected impression; if the idea persists, the 
shower is repeated, but care is taken to avoid the hard tone and 
the shocking terms that would cause rebellion; on the contrary, 
the madman is made to understand that it is for his sake and 
reluctantly that we resort to such violent measures; sometimes we 
add a joke, taking care not to go too far with it.”16 This almost 
arithmetical obviousness of punishment, repeated as often as 
necessary, the recognition of transgression by its repression—all 
this must end in the internalization of the juridical instance, and 
the birth of remorse in the inmate’s mind: it is only at this point 
that the judges agree to stop the punishment, certain that it will 
continue indefinitely in the inmate’s conscience. One maniac had 
the habit of tearing her clothes and breaking any object that 
came into her hands; she was given showers, she was put into a 
straitjacket, she finally appeared “humiliated and dismayed”; but 
fearing that this shame might be transitory and this remorse too 
superficial, “the director, in order to impress a feeling of terror 
upon her, spoke to her with the most energetic firmness, but 
without anger, and announced to her that she would henceforth 
be treated with the greatest severity.” The desired result was not 
long in coming: “Her repentance was announced by a torrent of 
tears which she shed for almost two hours.” The cycle is 
complete twice over: the transgression is punished and its author 
recognizes her guilt. 

There were, however, madmen who escaped from this 
movement and resisted the moral synthesis it brought about. 
These latter would be set apart in the heart of the asylum, 
forming a new confined population, which could not even relate 
to justice. When we speak of Pinel and his work of liberation, we 
too often omit this second reclusion. We have already seen that 
he denied the benefits of asylum reform to “fanatics who believe 
themselves inspired and seek to make converts, and who take a 
perfidious pleasure in inciting the other madmen to disobedience 


278 


on the pretext that it is better to obey God than man.” But 
confinement and the dungeon will be equally obligatory for 
“those who cannot be subjected to the general law of work and 
who, in malicious activity, enjoy tormenting the other inmates, 
provoking and ceaselessly inciting them to subjects of discord,” 
and for women “who during their seizures have an irresistible 
propensity to steal anything they can lay their hands on.” 
Disobedience by religious fanaticism, resistance to work, and 
theft, the three great transgressions against bourgeois society, the 
three major offenses against its essential values, are not excusable, 
even by madness; they deserve imprisonment pure and simple, 
exclusion in the most rigorous sense of the term, since they all 
manifest the same resistance to the moral and social uniformity 
that forms the raison d'etre of Pinefs asylum. 

Formerly, unreason was set outside of judgment, to be 
delivered, arbitrarily, to the powers of reason. Now it is judged, 
and not only upon entering the asylum, in order to be 
recognized, classified, and made innocent forever; it is caught, on 
the contrary, in a perpetual judgment, which never ceases to 
pursue it and to apply sanctions, to proclaim its transgressions, to 
require honorable amends, to exclude, finally, those whose 
transgressions risk compromising the social order. Madness 
escaped from the arbitrary only in order to enter a kind of 
endless trial for which the asylum furnished simultaneously 
police, magistrates, and torturers; a trial whereby any 
transgression in life, by a virtue proper to life in the asylum, 
becomes a social crime, observed, condemned, and punished; a 
trial which has no outcome but in a perpetual recommencement 
in the internalized form of remorse. The madmen “delivered” by 
Pinel and, after him, the madmen of modern confinement are 
under arraignment; if they have the privilege of no longer being 
associated or identified with convicts, they are condemned, at 
every moment, to be subject to an accusation whose text is never 
given, for it is their entire life in the asylum which constitutes it. 


279 



The asylum of the age of positivism, which it is Pinel’s glory to 
have founded, is not a free realm of observation, diagnosis, and 
therapeutics; it is a juridical space where one is accused, judged, 
and condemned, and from which one is never released except by 
the version of this trial in psychological depth—that is, by 
remorse. Madness will be punished in the asylum, even if it is 
innocent outside of it. For a long time to come, and until our 
own day at least, it is imprisoned in a moral world. 

To silence, to recognition in the mirror, to perpetual 
judgment, we must add a fourth structure peculiar to the world 
of the asylum as it was constituted at the end of the eighteenth 
century: this is the apotheosis of the medical personage. Of them 
all, it is doubtless the most important, since it would authorize 
not only new contacts between doctor and patient, but a new 
relation between insanity and medical thought, and ultimately 
command the whole modern experience of madness. Hitherto, 
we find in the asylums only the same structures of confinement, 
but displaced and deformed. With the new status of the medical 
personage, the deepest meaning of confinement is abolished: 
mental disease, with the meanings we now give it, is made 
possible. 

The work of Tuke and of Pinel, whose spirit and values are so 
different, meet in this transformation of the medical personage. 
The physician, as we have seen, played no part in the life of 
confinement. Now he becomes the essential figure of the asylum. 
He is in charge of entry. The ruling at the Retreat is precise: “On 
the admission of patients, the committee should, in general, 
require a certificate signed by a medical person.... It should also 
be stated whether the patient is afflicted with any complaint 
independent of insanity. It is also desirable that some account 
should be sent, how long the patient has been disordered; 
whether any, or what sort of medical means have been used. ”17 
From the end of the eighteenth century, the medical certificate 


280 


becomes almost obligatory for the confinement of madmen. But 
within the asylum itself, the doctor takes a preponderant place, 
insofar as he converts it into a medical space. However, and this 
is the essential point, the doctor s intervention is not made by 
virtue of a medical skill or power that he possesses in himself and 
that would be justified by a body of objective knowledge. It is not 
as a scientist that homo medicus has authority in the asylum, but 
as a wise man. If the medical profession is required, it is as a 
juridical and moral guarantee, not in the name of science. A man 
of great probity, of utter virtue and scruple, who had had long 
experience in the asylum would do as well. For the medical 
enterprise is only a part of an enormous moral task that must be 
accomplished at the asylum, and which alone can ensure the cure 
of the insane: “Must it not be an inviolable law in the 
administration of any establishment for the insane, whether 
public or private, to grant the maniac all the liberty that the 
safety of his person and of that of others permits, and to 
proportion his repression to the greater or lesser seriousness of 
danger of his deviations ..., to gather all the facts that can serve 
to enlighten the physician in treatment, to study with care the 
particular varieties of behavior and temperament, and 
accordingly to use gentleness or firmness, conciliatory terms or 
the tone of authority and an inflexible severity?”! o According to 
Samuel Tuke, the first doctor appointed at the Retreat was 
recommended by his “indefatigable perseverance”; doubtless he 
had no particular knowledge of mental illnesses when he entered 
the asylum, but “he entered on his office with the anxiety and 
ardor of a feeling mind, upon the exertion of whose skill, 
depended the dearest interest of many of his fellow-creatures.” 
He tried the various remedies that his own common sense and 
the experience of his predecessors suggested. But he was soon 
disappointed, not because the results were bad, or that the 
number of cures was minimal: “Yet the medical means were so 


281 


imperfectly connected with the progress of recovery, that he 
could not avoid suspecting them, to be rather concomitants than 
causes.” He then realized that there was little to be done using 
the medical methods known up to that time. The concern for 
humanity prevailed within him, and he decided to use no 
medicament that would be too disagreeable to the patient. But it 
must not be thought that the doctor s role had little importance 
at the Retreat: by the visits he paid regularly to the patients, by 
the authority he exercised in the house over all the staff, “the 
physician ... sometimes possesses more influence over the 
patients’ minds, than the other attendants.” 

It is thought that Tuke and Pinel opened the asylum to 
medical knowledge. They did not introduce science, but a 
personality, whose powers borrowed from science only their 
disguise, or at most their justification. These powers, by their 
nature, were of a moral and social order; they took root in the 
madman’s minority status, in the insanity of his person, not of 
his mind. If the medical personage could isolate madness, it was 
not because he knew it, but because he mastered it; and what for 
positivism would be an image of objectivity was only the other 
side of this domination. “It is a very important object to win the 
confidence of these sufferers, and to arouse in them feelings of 
respect and obedience, which can only be the fruit of superior 
discernment, distinguished education, and dignity of tone and 
manner. Stupidity, ignorance, and the lack of principles, 
sustained by a tyrannical harshness, may incite fear, but always 
inspire distrust. The keeper of madmen who has obtained 
domination over them directs and rules their conduct as he 
pleases; he must be endowed with a firm character, and on 
occasion display an imposing strength. He must threaten little 
but carry out his threats, and if he is disobeyed, punishment must 
immediately ensue. ”19 The physician could exercise his absolute 
authority in the world of the asylum only insofar as, from the 


282 


beginning, he was Father and Judge, Family and Law—his 
medical practice being for a long time no more than a 
complement to the old rites of Order, Authority, and 
Punishment. And Pinel was well aware that the doctor cures 
when, exclusive of modern therapeutics, he brings into play these 
immemorial figures. 

Pinel cites the case of a girl of seventeen who had been raised 
by her parents with “extreme indulgence”; she had fallen into a 
“giddy, mad delirium without any cause that could be 
determined”; at the hospital she was treated with great 
gentleness, but she always showed a certain “haughtiness” which 
could not be tolerated at the asylum; she spoke “of her parents 
with nothing but bitterness.” It was decided to subject her to a 
regime of strict authority; “the keeper, in order to tame this 
inflexible character, seized the moment of the bath and expressed 
himself forcibly concerning certain unnatural persons who dared 
oppose their parents and disdain their authority. He warned the 
girl she would henceforth be treated with all the severity she 
deserved, for she herself was opposed to her cure and 
dissimulated with insurmountable obstinacy the basic cause of 
her illness.” Through this new rigor and these threats, the sick 
girl felt “profoundly moved ... she ended by acknowledging her 
wrongs and making a frank confession that she had suffered a 
loss of reason as the result of a forbidden romantic attachment, 
naming the person who had been its object.” After this first 
confession, the cure became easy: “a most favorable alteration 
occurred ... she was henceforth soothed and could not 
sufficiently express her gratitude toward the keeper who had 
brought an end to her continual agitation, and had restored 
tranquillity and calm to her heart.” There is not a moment of the 
story that could not be transcribed in psychoanalytical terms. To 
such a degree was it true that the medical personage, according 
to Pinel, had to act not as the result of an objective definition of 
the disease or a specific classifying diagnosis, but by relying upon 


283 



that prestige which envelops the secrets of the Family, of 
Authority, of Punishment, and of Love; it is by bringing such 
powers into play, by wearing the mask of Father and of Judge, 
that the physician, by one of those abrupt short cuts that leave 
aside mere medical competence, became the almost magic 
perpetrator of the cure, and assumed the aspect of a 
Thaumaturge; it was enough that he observed and spoke, to 
cause secret faults to appear, insane presumptions to vanish, and 
madness at last to yield to reason. His presence and his words 
were gifted with that power of disalienation, which at one blow 
revealed the transgression and restored the order of morality. 

It is a curious paradox to see medical practice enter the 
uncertain domain of the quasi-miraculous at the very moment 
when the knowledge of mental illness tries to assume a positive 
meaning. On the one hand, madness puts itself at a distance in 
an objective field where the threats of unreason disappear; but at 
this same moment, the madman tends to form with the doctor, 
in an unbroken unity, a “couple” whose complicity dates back to 
very old links. Life in the asylum as Tuke and Pinel constituted it 
permitted the birth of that delicate structure which would 
become the essential nucleus of madness—a structure that 
formed a kind of microcosm in which were symbolized the 
massive structures of bourgeois society and its values: Family- 
Child relations, centered on the theme of paternal authority; 
Transgression-Punishment relations, centered on the theme of 
immediate justice; Madness-Disorder relations, centered on the 
theme of social and moral order. It is from these that the 
physician derives his power to cure; and it is to the degree that 
the patient finds himself, by so many old links, already alienated 
in the doctor, within the doctor-patient couple, that the doctor 
has the almost miraculous power to cure him. 

In the time of Pinel and Tuke, this power had nothing 
extraordinary about it; it was explained and demonstrated in the 
efficacity, simply, of moral behavior; it was no more mysterious 


284 



than the power of the eighteenth-century doctor when he diluted 
fluids or relaxed fibers. But very soon the meaning of this moral 
practice escaped the physician, to the very extent that he 
enclosed his knowledge in the norms of positivism: from the 
beginning of the nineteenth century, the psychiatrist no longer 
quite knew what was the nature of the power he had inherited 
from the great reformers, and whose efficacity seemed so foreign 
to his idea of mental illness and to the practice of all other 
doctors. 

This psychiatric practice, mysterious even to those who used 
it, is very important in the situation of the madman within the 
medical world. First because medicine of the mind for the first 
time in the history of Western science was to assume almost 
complete autonomy: from the time of the Greeks, it had been no 
more than a chapter of medicine, and we have seen Willis study 
madness under the rubric “diseases of the head”; after Pinel and 
Tuke, psychiatry would become a medicine of a particular style: 
those most eager to discover the origin of madness in organic 
causes or in hereditary dispositions would not be able to avoid 
this style. They would be all the more unable to avoid it in that 
this particular style—bringing into play increasingly obscure 
moral powers—would originally be a sort of bad conscience; they 
would increasingly confine themselves in positivism, the more 
they felt their practice slipping out of it. 

As positivism imposes itself upon medicine and psychiatry, 
this practice becomes more and more obscure, the psychiatrist’s 
power more and more miraculous, and the doctor-patient couple 
sinks deeper into a strange world. In the patient’s eyes, the 
doctor becomes a thaumaturge; the authority he has borrowed 
from order, morality, and the family now seems to derive from 
himself; it is because he is a doctor that he is believed to possess 
these powers, and while Pinel, with Tuke, strongly asserted that 
his moral action was not necessarily linked to any scientific 
competence, it was thought, and by the patient first of all, that it 


285 



was in the esotericism of his knowledge, in some almost 
daemonic secret of knowledge, that the doctor had found the 
power to unravel insanity; and increasingly the patient would 
accept this self-surrender to a doctor both divine and satanic, 
beyond human measure in any case; increasingly he would 
alienate himself in the physician, accepting entirely and in 
advance all his prestige, submitting from the very first to a will 
he experienced as magic, and to a science he regarded as 
prescience and divination, thus becoming the ideal and perfect 
correlative of those powers he projected upon the doctor, pure 
object without any resistance except his own inertia, quite ready 
to become precisely that hysteric in whom Charcot exalted the 
doctor’s marvelous powers. If we wanted to analyze the profound 
structures of objectivity in the knowledge and practice of 
nineteenth-century psychiatry from Pinel to Freud, 20 we should 
have to show in fact that such objectivity was from the start a 
reification of a magical nature, which could only be accomplished 
with the complicity of the patient himself, and beginning from a 
transparent and clear moral practice, gradually forgotten as 
positivism imposed its myths of scientific objectivity; a practice 
forgotten in its origins and its meaning, but always used and 
always present. What we call psychiatric practice is a certain 
moral tactic contemporary with the end of the eighteenth 
century, preserved in the rites of asylum life, and overlaid by the 
myths of positivism. 

But if the doctor soon became a thaumaturge for the patient, 
he could not be one in his own positivist doctor’s eyes. That 
obscure power whose origin he no longer knew, in which he 
could not decipher the patient’s complicity, and in which he 
would not consent to acknowledge the ancient powers which 
constituted it, nevertheless had to be given some status; and since 
nothing in positivist understanding could justify such a transfer 
of will or similar remote-control operations, the moment would 


286 


soon come when madness itself would be held responsible for 
such anomalies. These cures without basis, which must be 
recognized as not being false cures, would soon become the true 
cures of false illnesses. Madness was not what one believed, nor 
what it believed itself to be; it was infinitely less than itself: a 
combination of persuasion and mystification. We can see here 
the genesis of Babinskf s pithiatism. And by a strange reversal, 
thought leaped back almost two centuries to the era when 
between madness, false madness, and the simulation of madness, 
the limit was indistinct—identical symptoms confused to the 
point where transgression replaced unity; further still, medical 
thought finally effected an identification over which all Western 
thought since Greek medicine had hesitated: the identification of 
madness with madness—that is, of the medical concept with the 
critical concept of madness. At the end of the nineteenth 
century, and in the thought of Babinski’s contemporaries, we 
find that prodigious postulate, which no medicine had yet dared 
formulate: that madness, after all, was only madness. 

Thus while the victim of mental illness is entirely alienated in 
the real person of his doctor, the doctor dissipates the reality of 
the mental illness in the critical concept of madness. So that 
there remains, beyond the empty forms of positivist thought, 
only a single concrete reality: the doctor-patient couple in which 
all alienations are summarized, linked, and loosened. And it is to 
this degree that all nineteenth-century psychiatry really 
converges on Freud, the first man to accept in all its seriousness 
the reality of the physician-patient couple, the first to consent 
not to look away nor to investigate elsewhere, the first not to 
attempt to hide it in a psychiatric theory that more or less 
harmonized with the rest of medical knowledge; the first to 
follow its consequences with absolute rigor. Freud demystified all 
the other asylum structures: he abolished silence and observation, 
he eliminated madness’s recognition of itself in the mirror of its 
own spectacle, he silenced the instances of condemnation. But 


287 



on the other hand he exploited the structure that enveloped the 
medical personage; he amplified its thaumaturgical virtues, 
preparing for its omnipotence a quasi-divine status. He focussed 
upon this single presence—concealed behind the patient and 
above him, in an absence that is also a total presence—all the 
powers that had been distributed in the collective existence of the 
asylum; he transformed this into an absolute Observation, a pure 
and circumspect Silence, a Judge who punishes and rewards in a 
judgment that does not even condescend to language; he made it 
the Mirror in which madness, in an almost motionless 
movement, clings to and casts off itself. 

To the doctor, Freud transferred all the structures Pinel and 
Tuke had set up within confinement. He did deliver the patient 
from the existence of the asylum within which his “liberators” 
had alienated him; but he did not deliver him from what was 
essential in this existence; he regrouped its powers, extended 
them to the maximum by uniting them in the doctor s hands; he 
created the psychoanalytical situation where, by an inspired 
short-circuit, alienation becomes disalienating because, in the 
doctor, it becomes a subject. 

The doctor, as an alienating figure, remains the key to 
psychoanalysis. It is perhaps because it did not suppress this 
ultimate structure, and because it referred all the others to it, that 
psychoanalysis has not been able, will not be able, to hear the 
voices of unreason, nor to decipher in themselves the signs of the 
madman. Psychoanalysis can unravel some of the forms of 
madness; it remains a stranger to the sovereign enterprise of 
unreason. It can neither liberate nor transcribe, nor most 
certainly explain, what is essential in this enterprise. 

Since the end of the eighteenth century, the life of unreason 
no longer manifests itself except in the lightning-flash of works 
such as those of Holderlin, of Nerval, of Nietzsche, or of Artaud 
—forever irreducible to those alienations that can be cured, 


288 



resisting by their own strength that gigantic moral imprisonment 
which we are in the habit of calling, doubtless by antiphrasis, the 
liberation of the insane by Pinel and Tuke. 


289 




290 


CONCLUSION 


THE Goya who painted The Madhouse must have experienced 
before that grovel of flesh in the void, that nakedness among 
bare walls, something related to a contemporary pathos: the 
symbolic tinsel that crowned the insane kings left in full view 
suppliant bodies, bodies vulnerable to chains and whips, which 
contradicted the delirium of the faces, less by the poverty of these 
trappings than by the human truth which radiated from all that 
unprofaned flesh. The man in the tricorne is not mad because he 
has stuck an old hat upon his nakedness; but within this 
madman in a hat rises—by the inarticulate power of his muscular 
body, of his savage and marvelously unconstricted youth—a 
human presence already liberated and somehow free since the 
beginning of time, by his birthright. The Madhouse is less 
concerned with madness and those strange faces one finds 
elsewhere in the Caprichos , moreover, than with the vast 
monotony of these new bodies, shown in all their vigor, and 
whose gestures, if they invoke their dreams, celebrate especially 
their dark freedom: its language is close to the world of Pinel. 

The Goya of the Disparates and the Quinta del Sordo 
addresses himself to another madness. Not that of madmen cast 
into prison, but that of man cast into darkness. Does Goya not 
link us, by memory, with the old world of enchantments, of 
fantastic rides, of witches perched on the branches of dead trees? 
Is not the monster whispering its secrets into the ears of the 
Monk related to the gnome who fascinated Bosch’s Saint 
Anthony? But they are different for Goya, and their prestige, 
which overshadows all his later work, derives from another 
power. For Bosch or Brueghel, these forms are generated by the 
world itself; through the fissures of a strange poetry, they rise 
from stones and plants, they well out of an animal howl; the 


291 



whole complicity of nature is not too much for their dance. 
Goya s forms are born out of nothing: they have no background, 
in the double sense that they are silhouetted against only the 
most monotonous darkness, and that nothing can assign them 
their origin, their limit, and their nature. The Disparates are 
without landscape, without walls, without setting—and this is 
still a further difference from the Caprichos', there is not a star in 
the night sky of the great human bats we see in the Way oj 
Flying. The branch on which these witches jabber—out of what 
tree does it grow? Does it fly? Toward what sabbath, and what 
clearing? Nothing in all this deals with a world, neither this one 
nor any other. It is indeed a question of that Sleep of Reason 
which Goya, in 1797, had already made the first image of the 
“universal idiom”; it is a question of a night which is doubtless 
that of classical unreason, that triple night into which Orestes 
sank. But in that night, man communicates with what is deepest 
in himself, and with what is most solitary. The desert of Bosch’s 
Saint Anthony was infinitely populous; and even if it was a 
product of her imagination, the landscape that Dulle Griet 
moved through was marked by a whole human language. Goya s 
Monk, with that hot beast against his back, its paws on his 
shoulders and its mouth panting at his ear, remains alone: no 
secret is revealed. All that is present is the most internal, and at 
the same time the most savagely free, of forces: the power which 
hacks apart the bodies in the Gran Disparate, which breaks free 
and assaults our eyes in the Raging Madness. Beyond that point, 
the faces themselves decompose; this is no longer the madness of 
the Caprichos , which tied on masks truer than the truth of faces; 
this is a madness beneath the mask, a madness that eats away 
faces, corrodes features; there are no longer eyes or mouths, but 
glances shot from nowhere and staring at nothing (as in the 
Witches Sabbath ); or screams from black holes (as in the 
Pilgrimage of Saint Isidore). Madness has become man’s 
possibility of abolishing both man and the world—and even 


292 



those images that challenge the world and deform man. It is, far 
beyond dreams, beyond the nightmare of bestiality, the last 
recourse: the end and the beginning of everything. Not because it 
is a promise, as in German lyricism, but because it is the 
ambiguity of chaos and apocalypse: Goya s Idiot who shrieks and 
twists his shoulder to escape from the nothingness that 
imprisons him—is this the birth of the first man and his first 
movement toward liberty, or the last convulsion of the last dying 
man? 

And this madness that links and divides time, that twists the 
world into the ring of a single night, this madness so foreign to 
the experience of its contemporaries, does it not transmit—to 
those able to receive it, to Nietzsche and to Artaud—those barely 
audible voices of classical unreason, in which it was always a 
question of nothingness and night, but amplifying them now to 
shrieks and frenzy? But giving them for the first time an 
expression, a droit de cite , and a hold on Western culture which 
makes possible all contestations, as well as total contestation? But 
restoring their primitive savagery? 

Sade’s calm, patient language also gathers up the final words 
of unreason and also gives them, for the future, a remoter 
meaning. Between Goyas broken drawings and that 
uninterrupted stream of words continuing from the first volume 
of Justine to the tenth of Juliette , there is doubtless nothing in 
common except a certain movement that retraces the course of 
contemporary lyricism, drying up its sources, rediscovering the 
secret of unreason s nothingness. 

Within the chateau where Sade’s hero confines himself, 
within the convents, the forests, the dungeons where he endlessly 
pursues the agony of his victims, it seems at first glance that 
nature can act with utter freedom. There man rediscovers a truth 
he had forgotten, though it was manifest: what desire can be 
contrary to nature, since it was given to man by nature itself? 
And since it was taught by nature in the great lesson of life and 


293 



death which never stops repeating itself in the world? The 
madness of desire, insane murders, the most unreasonable 
passions—all are wisdom and reason, since they are a part of the 
order of nature. Everything that morality and religion, 
everything that a clumsy society has stifled in man, revives in the 
castle of murders. There man is finally attuned to his own 
nature; or rather, by an ethic peculiar to this strange 
confinement, man must scrupulously maintain, without 
deviation, his fidelity to nature: a strict task, a total enterprise: 
“You will know nothing unless you have known everything; if 
you are timid enough to stop with Nature, she will escape you 
forever.”! Conversely, if man has wounded or changed nature, it 
is man’s task to repair the damage through the mathematics of a 
sovereign vengeance: “Nature caused us all to be born equal; if 
fate is pleased to disturb this plan of the general law, it is our 
responsibility to correct its caprice, and to repair by our attention 
the usurpations of the stronger.”^ The slowness of revenge, like 
the insolence of desire, belongs to nature. There is nothing that 
the madness of men invents which is not either nature made 
manifest or nature restored. 

But this is only the first phase of Sade’s thought: the ironic 
justification, both rational and lyrical, the gigantic pastiche, of 
Rousseau. Beyond this demonstration-by-absurdity of the 
inanity of contemporary philosophy, beyond all its verbiage 
about man and nature, the real decisions are still to be made: 
decisions that are also breaks, in which the links between man 
and his natural being disappear. 3 The famous Society of the 
Friends of Crime, the project of a Swedish Constitution, once 
we remove their stinging references to the Social Contract and to 
the proposed constitutions for Poland or Corsica, establish 
nothing but the sovereign rigor of subjectivity in the rejection of 
all natural liberty and all natural equality: uncontrolled disposal 
of one member by the other, the unconditional exercise of 


294 


violence, the limitless application of the right of death—this 
entire society, whose only link is the very rejection of a link, 
appears to be a dismissal of nature—the only cohesion asked of 
individuals is intended to protect, not a natural existence, but the 
free exercise of sovereignty over and against nature. 4 The 
relation established by Rousseau is precisely reversed; sovereignty 
no longer transposes the natural existence; the latter is only an 
object for the sovereign, which permits him to measure his total 
liberty. Followed to its logical conclusion, desire leads only in 
appearance to the rediscovery of nature. Actually, for Sade there 
is no return to the natal terrain, no hope that the first rejection of 
social order may surreptitiously become the re-established order 
of happiness, through a dialectic of nature renouncing and thus 
confirming itself. The solitary madness of desire that still for 
Hegel, as for the eighteenth-century philosophers, plunges man 
into a natural world that is immediately resumed in a social 
world, for Sade merely casts man into a void that dominates 
nature in a total absence of proportion and community, into the 
endlessly repeated nonexistence of gratification. The night of 
madness is thus limitless; what might have been supposed to be 
man’s violent nature was only the infinity of non-nature. 

Here is the source of Sade’s great monotony: as he advances, 
the settings dissolve; the surprises, the incidents, the pathetic or 
dramatic links of the scenes vanish. What was still vicissitude in 
Justine —an event experienced, hence new—becomes in Juliette a 
sovereign game, always triumphant, without negativity, and 
whose perfection is such that its novelty can only be its similarity 
to itself. As with Goya, there are no longer any backgrounds for 
these meticulous Disparates. And yet in this absence of decor, 
which can as easily be total night as absolute day (there are no 
shadows in Sade), we advance slowly toward a goal: the death of 
Justine. Her innocence had exhausted even the desire to torment 
it. We cannot say that crime had not overcome her virtue; we 


295 



must say inversely that her natural virtue had brought her to the 
point of having exhausted all the possible means of being an 
object for crime. And at this point, when crime can do nothing 
more than drive her from the domain of its sovereignty (Juliette 
expels her from the Chateau de Noirceuil), Nature in her turn, so 
long dominated, scorned, profaned,5 submits entirely to that 
which contradicted her: Nature in turn enters madness, and 
there, in an instant, but for an instant only, restores her 
omnipotence. The storm that is unleashed, the lightning that 
strikes and consumes Justine, is Nature become criminal 
subjectivity. This death that seems to escape from the insane 
domain of Juliette belongs to Nature more profoundly than any 
other; the night of storm, of thunder and lightning, is a sufficient 
sign that Nature is lacerating herself, that she has reached the 
extreme point of her dissension, and that she is revealing in this 
golden flash a sovereignty which is both herself and something 
quite outside herself: the sovereignty of a mad heart that has 
attained, in its solitude, the limits of the world that wounds it, 
that turns it against itself and abolishes it at the moment when to 
have mastered it so well gives it the right to identify itself with 
that world. That lightning-flash which Nature drew from herself 
in order to strike Justine was identical with the long existence of 
Juliette, who would also disappear in solitude, leaving no trace or 
corpse or anything upon which Nature could claim her due. The 
nothingness of unreason, in which the language of Nature had 
died forever, has become a violence of Nature and against 
Nature, to the point of the savage abolition of itself.6 

For Sade as for Goya, unreason continues to watch by night; 
but in this vigil it joins with fresh powers. The non-being it once 
was now becomes the power to annihilate. Through Sade and 
Goya, the Western world received the possibility of transcending 
its reason in violence, and of recovering tragic experience beyond 
the promises of dialectic. 


296 


After Sade and Goya, and since them, unreason has belonged 
to whatever is decisive, for the modern world, in any work of art: 
that is, whatever any work of art contains that is both murderous 
and constraining. 

The madness of Tasso, the melancholia of Swift, the delirium 
of Rousseau belong to their works, just as these works belong to 
their authors. Here in the texts, there in the lives of the men, the 
same violence spoke, or the same bitterness; visions certainly 
were exchanged; language and delirium interlaced. But further, 
the work of art and madness, in classical experience, were more 
profoundly united at another level: paradoxically, at the point 
where they limited one another. For there existed a region where 
madness challenged the work of art, reduced it ironically, made 
of its iconographic landscape a pathological world of 
hallucinations; that language which was delirium was not a work 
of art. And conversely, delirium was robbed of its meager truth 
as madness if it was called a work of art. But by admitting this 
very fact, there was no reduction of one by the other, but rather 
(remembering Montaigne) a discovery of the central incertitude 
where the work of art is born, at the moment when it stops being 
born and is truly a work of art. In this opposition, to which 
Tasso and Swift bore witness after Lucretius—and which it was 
vain to attempt to separate into lucid intervals and crises—was 
disclosed a distance where the very truth of a work of art raised a 
problem: was it madness, or a work of art? Inspiration, or 
hallucination? A spontaneous babble of words, or the pure 
origins of language? Must its truth, even before its birth, be 
taken from the wretched truth of men, or discovered far beyond 
its origin, in the being that it presumes? The madness of the 
writer was, for other men, the chance to see being born, over and 
over again, in the discouragement of repetition and disease, the 
truth of the work of art. 

The madness of Nietzsche, the madness of Van Gogh or of 
Artaud, belongs to their work perhaps neither more nor less 


297 



profoundly, but in quite another way. The frequency in the 
modern world of works of art that explode out of madness no 
doubt proves nothing about the reason of that world, about the 
meaning of such works, or even about the relations formed and 
broken between the real world and the artists who produced such 
works. And yet this frequency must be taken seriously, as if it 
were the insistence of a question: from the time of Holderlin and 
Nerval, the number of writers, painters, and musicians who have 
“succumbed” to madness has increased; but let us make no 
mistake here; between madness and the work of art, there has 
been no accommodation, no more constant exchange, no 
communication of languages; their opposition is much more 
dangerous than formerly; and their competition now allows no 
quarter; theirs is a game of life and death. Artaud’s madness does 
not slip through the fissures of the work of art; his madness is 
precisely the absence of the work of art , the reiterated presence of 
that absence, its central void experienced and measured in all its 
endless dimensions. Nietzsche’s last cry, proclaiming himself 
both Christ and Dionysos, is not on the border of reason and 
unreason, in the perspective of the work of art, their common 
dream, finally realized and immediately vanishing, of a 
reconciliation of the “shepherds of Arcady and the fishermen of 
Tiberias”; it is the very annihilation of the work of art, the point 
where it becomes impossible and where it must fall silent; the 
hammer has just fallen from the philosopher’s hands. And Van 
Gogh, who did not want to ask “permission from doctors to 
paint pictures,” knew quite well that his work and his madness 
were incompatible. 

Madness is the absolute break with the work of art; it forms 
the constitutive moment of abolition, which dissolves in time the 
truth of the work of art; it draws the exterior edge, the line of 
dissolution, the contour against the void. Artaud’s oeuvre 
experiences its own absence in madness, but that experience, the 
fresh courage of that ordeal, all those words hurled against a 


298 



fundamental absence of language, all that space of physical 
suffering and terror which surrounds or rather coincides with the 
void—that is the work of art itself: the sheer cliff over the abyss 
of the work’s absence. Madness is no longer the space of 
indecision through which it was possible to glimpse the original 
truth of the work of art, but the decision beyond which this truth 
ceases irrevocably, and hangs forever over history. It is of little 
importance on exactly which day in the autumn of 1888 
Nietzsche went mad for good, and after which his texts no 
longer afford philosophy but psychiatry: all of them, including 
the postcard to Strindberg, belong to Nietzsche, and all are 
related to The Birth of Tragedy. But we must not think of this 
continuity in terms of a system, of a thematics, or even of an 
existence: Nietzsche’s madness—that is, the dissolution of his 
thought—is that by which his thought opens out onto the 
modern world. What made it impossible makes it immediate for 
us; what took it from Nietzsche offers it to us. This does not 
mean that madness is the only language common to the work of 
art and the modern world (dangers of the pathos of malediction, 
inverse and symmetrical danger of psychoanalyses); but it means 
that, through madness, a work that seems to drown in the world, 
to reveal there its non-sense, and to transfigure itself with the 
features of pathology alone, actually engages within itself the 
world’s time, masters it, and leads it; by the madness which 
interrupts it, a work of art opens a void, a moment of silence, a 
question without answer, provokes a breach without 
reconciliation where the world is forced to question itself. What 
is necessarily a profanation in the work of art returns to that 
point, and, in the time of that work swamped in madness, the 
world is made aware of its guilt. Henceforth, and through the 
mediation of madness, it is the world that becomes culpable (for 
the first time in the Western world) in relation to the work of 
art; it is now arraigned by the work of art, obliged to order itself 
by its language, compelled by it to a task of recognition, of 


299 



reparation, to the task of restoring reason from that unreason and 
to that unreason. The madness in which the work of art is 
engulfed is the space of our enterprise, it is the endless path to 
fulfillment, it is our mixed vocation of apostle and exegete. This 
is why it makes little difference when the first voice of madness 
insinuated itself into Nietzsche’s pride, into Van Gogh’s 
humility. There is no madness except as the final instant of the 
work of art—the work endlessly drives madness to its limits; 
where thereis a work of art , there is no madness ; and yet madness is 
contemporary with the work of art, since it inaugurates the time 
of its truth. The moment when, together, the work of art and 
madness are born and fulfilled is the beginning of the time when 
the world finds itself arraigned by that work of art and 
responsible before it for what it is. 

Ruse and new triumph of madness: the world that thought to 
measure and justify madness through psychology must justify 
itself before madness, since in its struggles and agonies it 
measures itself by the excess of works like those of Nietzsche, of 
Van Gogh, of Artaud. And nothing in itself, especially not what 
it can know of madness, assures the world that it is justified by 
such works of madness. 


300 



NOTES 


301 



CHAPTER I. “STULTIFERA NAVIS” 


1. Cf. J. Lebeuf, Histoire de la ville et de tout le diocese de Paris 
(Paris, 1754-58). 

2. Tristan etlseut, Bossuat edition, pp. 219-22. 

3. Pierre de Lancre, Tableau de binconstance des mauvais anges 
(Paris, 1612). 

4. In this sense, the experience of madness exhibits a rigorous 
continuity with the experience of leprosy. The ritual of the 
leper’s exclusion showed that he was, as a living man, the 
very presence of death. 

5. Erasmus, The Praise of Folly, § 9. 

6. Louise Labe, Debat defolie et dlamour (Lyons, 1566), p. 98. 

7. Sebastian Brant, Stultifera navis, Latin translation of 1497, 
fol. 11. 

8. Saint-Evremond, SirPolitik would be, act V, scene ii. 

9. Cervantes, Don Quixote, Part II, Chap. 1. 

10. T. Gazoni, L’Ospedale depassi incurabili (Ferrara, 1586). Cf. 
Charles de Beys, UOspital desfous (1635). 

11. Mathurin Regnier, Satire XIV, w. 7-10. 


302 


CHAPTER II. THE GREAT CONFINEMENT 


1. Edict of 1656, article IV. Later the Saint-Esprit and the 
Enfants-Trouves would be added, and the Savonnerie 
withdrawn. 

2. Ibid., article XII. 

3. La Rochefoucauld-Liancourfs report in the name of the 
Committee on Mendicity to the Constituent Assembly 
(.Proces verbaux de lAssemblee nationale , Vol. XXI). 

4. From a spiritual point of view, poverty at the end of the 
sixteenth and the beginning of the seventeenth century was 
experienced as an apocalyptic threat. “One of the most 
evident signs that the coming of the Son of God and the end 
of time are at hand is the extreme of both spiritual and 
temporal poverty to which the world is reduced. These are 
evil days ... afflictions have multiplied because of the 
multitude of transgressions, pain being the inseparable 
shadow of evil.” (Jean-Pierre Camus, De la mendicite legitime 
des pauvres [Douai, 1634], pp. 3-4.) 

5. Musquinet de la Pagne, Bicetre reforme ou etablissement d'une 
maison de discipline (Paris, 1790), p. 22. 

6. Bossuet, Elevations sur les mysteres , Sixth Week, Twelfth 
Elevation. 

7. “We seek that God should serve our mad appetites, and that 
He should be as though subject to ourselves.” Calvin, Forty- 
ninth Sermon on Deuteronomy , July 3, 1555. 

8. Regulations of the Hopital General, articles XII and XIII. 

9. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Discours sur les sciences et les arts. 

10. John Howard, The State of the Prisons in England and Wales 
(London, 1784), p. 73. 


303 


11. Sermon cited in Pierre Collet, Vie de saint Vincent de Paul 
(Paris, 1818). 


304 


CHAPTER III. THE INSANE 


1. Francois Ravaisson, Les Archives de la Bastille (Paris, 1866- 
1904), Vol. XIII, pp. 161-62. 

2. Bibliotheque national, Fonds Clairambault, 986. 

3. It did happen, but very late, and doubtless under the 
influence of the practice which concerned madmen, that 
those afflicted with venereal disease were also exhibited. Pere 
Richard, in his Memoires, tells of the visit the Prince de 
Conde made to them with the Duke d’Enghien in order to 
“inspire him with a horror of vice.” ( Memoires du Pere 
Richard , manuscript in the Bibliotheque de la Ville de Paris, 
fol. 25.) 

4. Ned Ward, in The London Spy (London, 1700), cites the 
figure of twopence. 

5. “Everyone used to be admitted to visit Bicetre, and in good 
weather you might see at least two thousand persons a day. 
After paying your money, you were led by a guide into the 
section for the insane.” (. Memoires du Pere Richard\ loc. cit ., 
fol. 61). The visit included an Irish priest “who slept on 
straw,” a ship’s captain whom the sight of men made furious, 
“for it was the injustice of men that had driven him mad,” a 
young man “who sang in a ravishing fashion” {ibid.). 

6. Mirabeau (H.), Observations d’un voyageur anglais (Paris, 
1788), p. 213, n. 1. 

7. Jean-Etienne-Dominique Esquirol, “Memoire historique et 
statistique sur la Maison Royale de Charenton,” in Des 
maladies mentales (Paris, 1838), Vol. II, p. 212. 

8. Pascal, Pensees (Brunschvicg edition), no. 339. 

9. Bossuet, Pane'gyrique de saint Bernard , Preamble. 


305 


10. Saint Vincent here alludes to the text of Saint Paul (I Cor., I, 
23): “to the Jews, indeed, a stumbling-block and to the 
Gentiles foolishness.” 

11. Correspondance de saint Vincent de Paul , Coste edition (Paris, 
1920-24), Vol. V, p. 146. 


306 


CHAPTER IV. PASSION AND DELIRIUM 


1. Francis Boissier de Sauvages, Nosologie methodique (Lyons, 
1772), Vol. VII, p. 12. 

2. F. Bayle and H. Grangeon, Relation de letat de quelques 
personnes pretendues possedees faite d'autorite au Parlement de 
Toulouse (Toulouse, 1682), pp. 26-27. 

3. Malebranche, Recherche de la verite, Book V, Chap. 3. 

4. Sauvages, op. cit ., Vol. VII, p. 291. 

5. Robert Whytt, Traite' des maladies nerveuses (French trans., 
Paris, 1777), Vol. II, pp. 288-91. 

6. Charles-Gaspard de la Rive, “Sur un etablissement pour la 
guerison des alienes,” Bibliotheque britannique , Vol. VIII, p. 
304. 

7. Encyclopedie , article on Mania. 

8. LAme materielle, ou nouveau systeme sur les purs principes des 
philosophes anciens et modernes qui soutiennent son 
immateriality. Arsenal, manuscript no. 2239, p. 169. 

9. Paul Zacchias, Quaestiones medico-legales (Avignon, 1660- 
61), Book II, Vol. II, question 4, p. 119. 

10. Sauvages, op. cit., Vol. VII, p. 15. 

11. Ibid., p. 20. 

12. Ysbrand van Diemerbroek, Disputationes practicae, de morbis 
capitis , in Opera omnia anatomica et medica (Utrecht, 1685), 
Historia III, pp. 4-5. 

13. J.-D.-T. Bienville, De la nymphomanie (Amsterdam, 1771), 

pp. 140-53. 

14. Robert James, Dictionnaire universel de medecine (French 
trans., Paris, 1746-48), Vol. Ill, p. 977. 


307 


15. Ibid. 

16. Zacchias, op. cit ., Book I, Vol. II, question 4, p. 118. 

17. Archibald Pitcairne, quoted by Sauvages, op. cit ., Vol. VII, 
pp. 33 and 301. 

18. Encyclopedic , article on Madness. 

19. We should add Andromache herself, widow, and bride, and 
widow again, in her mourning garments and festive garb 
which ultimately mingle and say the same thing; and the 
luster of her royalty in the night of her slavery. 

20. Cf. for example annotations like the following, apropos of a 
madman confined for seventeen years at Saint-Lazare: “His 
health is fading greatly; it is to be hoped that he will soon 
die.” (Bibliotheque national, Fonds Clairambault, 986, fol. 
113) 


308 


CHAPTER V. ASPECTS OF MADNESS 


1. Johann Weyer, Depraestigiis daemonum (1563). 

2. Ibid. 

3. Apologiepour Monsieur Duncan. 

4. Ibid. 

5. Hippolyte-Jules la Mesnardiere, Trade de la melancolie (La 
Fleche, 1635), p. 10. 

6. Apologie pour Monsieur Duncan. 

7. Thomas Willis, Opera omnia (Lyons, 1681), Vol. II, p. 242. 

8. “A soldier became melancholic because of his parents’ 
rejection of a girl he desperately loved. He was distracted, 
complained of a severe headache, and of a continual 
heaviness in that part. He grew visibly thinner; his face 
turned pale and he became so weak that he voided his 
excrement without noticing it.... There was no delirium, 
although the patient gave no positive answers and seemed to 
be entirely absorbed. He never asked for either food or 
drink.” (Gazette salutaire, March 17, 1763) 

9. Robert James, Dictionnaire universel de medecine (French 
trans., Paris, 1746-48), Vol. IV, p. 1215. 

10. Encyclopedie , article on Mania. 

11. William Cullen, Institutions de medecine pratique (French 
trans., 2 vols., Paris, 1785), Vol. II, p. 315. 

12. M. Flemyng, Nevropathia sive de morbis hypochondriacis et 
hystericis (Amsterdam, 1741), pp. i-ii. 

13. Thomas Sydenham, Medecine pratique (French trans., Paris, 
1784), pp. 400-404. 

14. Ibid ., pp. 395-96. 


309 


15. Ibid., p. 394. 

16. Ibid., p. 394. 

17. Tean-Baptiste Pressavin, Nouveau traite des vapeurs (Lyons, 
1770), pp. 2-3. 

18. Robert Whytt, Traite des maladies nerveuses (French trans., 
Paris, 1777), Vol. I, pp. 23-24, 50-51. 

19. Ibid. , pp. 47, 126-27, 166-67. 

20. Simon-Andre Tissot, Traite' des nerfs et de leurs maladies 
(Paris, 1778-80), Vol. I, Part 2, p. 302. 

21. Ibid. , pp. 278-79, 302-3. 

22. Pressavin, op. cit ., p. 65. 

23. Louis-Sebastien Mercier, Tableau de Paris (Amsterdam, 
1783), Vol. Ill, p. 199. 


310 


CHAPTER VI. DOCTORS AND PATIENTS 


1. Madame de Sevigne used it a great deal, finding it “good 
against sadness” (cf. letters of October 16 and 20, 1675). 

2. Lange, Traite des vapeurs (Paris, 1689), p. 251. 

3. Consultation de la Closure, Arsenal, manuscript no. 4528, 
fol. 119. 

4. Joseph Raulin, Traite des affections vapor eases du sexe (Paris, 
1758), p. 339. 

5. Jean-Baptiste Pressavin, Nouveau Traite des vapeurs (Lyons, 
1770), Foreword, not paginated. 

6. A. Rostaing, Reflexions sur les affections vaporeuses (Paris, 
1778), p. 75. 

7. Jean-Etienne-Dominique Esquirol, Des maladies mentales 
(Paris, 1838), Vol. II, p. 225. 

8. Thomas Sydenham, “Dissertation sur faffection hysterique,” 
Medecine pratique (French trans., Paris, 1784), p. 425. 

9. William Cullen, Institutions de medecine pratique (French 
trans., Paris, 1785), Vol. II, p. 317. 

10. There is still some question whether the inventor of the 
rotatory machine was Maupertuis, Darwin, or the Dane 
Katzenstein. 

11. Encyclopedie , article on Music. 

12. Alexander Crichton, On Mental Diseases , cited in Elias 
Regnault, Du degre de competence des medecins (Paris, 1828), 
pp. 187-88. 

13. Cullen, op. cit., p. 307. 

14. Francois Leuret, Fragments psychologiques sur la folie (Paris, 
1834), pp. 308-21. 


311 


15. Cited by Robert Whytt, Traite des maladies nerveuses (French 
trans., Paris, 1777), Vol. I, p. 296. 

16. Thomas Willis, Opera omnia (Lyons, 1681), Vol. II, p. 261. 

17. M. Hulshorff, Discours sur lespenchants , read at the Academy 
of Berlin. Cited in the Gazette salutaire, August 17, 1769. 

18. Ibid., loc. cit. 

19. Encyclopedie , article on Melancholy. 

20. Bernardin de Saint-Pierre, Preambule de LArcadie. Oeuvres 
(Paris, 1818), Vol. VII, pp. 11-14. 

21. Simon-Andre Tissot, Avis aux gens de lettres sur leur sante 
(Lausanne, 1767), pp. 90-94. 

22. Philippe Pinel, Traite medico-philosophique sur I alienation 
mentale (Paris, 1801), pp. 238-39. 


312 


CHAPTER VII. THE GREAT FEAR 


1. Denis Diderot, Le Neveu de Rameau. Oeuvres (Pleiade 
edition), p. 435. 

2. Louis-Sebastien Mercier, Tableau de Paris (Amsterdam, 
1783), Vol. I, pp. 233-34. 

3. Ibid. , Vol. VIII, p. 1. 

4. Ibid. , p. 2. 

5. Musquinet de la Pagne, Bicetre reforme ou etablissement Tune 
maison de discipline (Paris, 1790), p. 16. 

6. a I knew, as did everyone, that Bicetre was both hospital and 
prison; but I did not know that the hospital had been built 
to nurture sickness, the prison to nurture crime.” (Mirabeau 
[H.], Observations Tun voyageur anglais [Paris, 1788], p. 6.) 

7. Mirabeau, op. cit ., p. 14. 

8. Simon-Andre Tissot, Trade' des nerfs et de leurs maladies 

(Paris, 1778-80), Vol. I, pp. iii-iv. 

9. In nineteenth-century evolutionism, madness is indeed a 
return, but along a chronological path\ it is not the absolute 
collapse of time. It is a question of time turned back, not of 
repetition in the strict sense. Psychoanalysis, which has tried 
to confront madness and unreason again, has found itself 
faced with this problem of time; fixation, death-wish, 
collective unconscious, archetype define more or less happily 
this heterogeneity of two temporal structures: that which is 
proper to the experience of Unreason and to the knowledge 
it envelops; that which is proper to the knowledge of 
madness, and to the science it authorizes. 

10. Johann Christoph Spurzheim, Observations sur la folie (Paris, 

1818). 


313 


11. J. C. N. Moehsen, Geschichte der Wissenschaften in der Mark 
Brandenburg (Berlin and Leipzig, 1781). 

12. Edme-Pierre Beauchesne, De Finfluence des affections de Fame 
dans les maladies nerveuses des femmes (Paris, 1783), p. 31. 

13. Ibid., p. 33. 

14. Ibid., pp. 37-38. 

15. “Causes physiques et morales des maux des nerfs,” Gazette 
salutaire, October 6, 1768 (anonymous article). 


314 


CHAPTER VIII. THE NEW DIVISION 


1. Mirabeau (H.), Des lettres de cachet et desprisons d’etat, Chap. 
11. Oeuvres (Merilhou edition), Vol. I, p. 264. 

2. Mirabeau (V.), LAmi des hommes (Paris, 1758), Vol. II, pp. 
414 ff. 

3. Mirabeau, Des lettres de cachet, p. 264. 

4. Jean-Pierre Brissot de Warville, Theorie des lois criminelles 
(Paris, 1781), Vol. I, p. 79. 

5. Encyclopedie, article on Hospital. 

6. Abbe de Recalde, Traite' sur les abus qui subsistent dans les 
hopitaux du royaume (Paris, 1786), pp. ii, iii. 

7. Mirabeau, LAmi des hommes, Vol. I, p. 22. 

8. Turgot, “Eloge de Gournay,” Oeuvres (Schelle edition), Vol. 

I, p. 607. 

9. Turgot, article on Foundation in the Encyclopedie. 

10. Turgot, “Lettre a Trudaine sur le Limousin,” Oeuvres 
(Schelle edition), Vol. II, pp. 478-95. 


315 


CHAPTER IX.THE BIRTH OF THE ASYLUM 


1. Charles-Gaspard de la Rive, letter to the editors of the 
Bibliotheque britannique concerning a new establishment for 
the cure of the insane. This text appeared in the Bibliotheque 
britannique, then in a separate brochure. De la Rive’s visit to 
the Retreat dates from 1798. 

2. Scipion Pinel, Traite' complet du regime sanitaire des alienes 
(Paris, 1836), p. 56. 

3. Samuel Tuke, Description of the Retreat, an Institution near 
York for Insane Persons of the Society of Friends (York, 1813), 
p. 50. 

4. Ibid., p. 23. 

5. Ibid., p. 121. 

6. Ibid., p. 141. 

7. Ibid.,p. 156. 

8. De la Rive, loc. cit.,p. 30. 

9. Philippe Pinel, Traite medico-philosophique sur I alienation 
mentale (Paris, 1801), p. 265. 

10. Ibid., p. 141. 

11. Ibid.,pp. 29-30. 

12. Scipion Pinel, op. cit., p. 63. 

13. Cited in Rene Semelaigne, Alienistes etphilanthropes (Paris, 
1912), Appendix, p. 502. 

14. Philippe Pinel, op. cit., p. 256. 

15. Ibid.,pp. 207-8. 

16. Ibid., p. 205. 

17. Cited in Tuke, op. cit., pp. 89-90. 


316 


18. Philippe Pinel, op. cit ., pp. 292-93. 

19. John Haslam, Observations on Insanity with Practical Remarks 
on This Disease (London, 1798), cited by Philippe Pinel, op. 
city pp. 253-54. 

20. These structures still persist in non-psychoanalytic 
psychiatry, and in many aspects of psychoanalysis itself. 


317 


CONCLUSION 


1. Cent vingt journees de Sodome , quoted by Maurice Blanchot, 
Lautre'amont et Sade (Paris, 1949), p. 235. 

2. Ibid., loc. cit.,p. 225. 

3. Infamy must be able to go as far as “to dismember nature and 
dislocate the universe.” Cent vingt journees de Sodome (Paris, 
1935), Vol. II, p. 369. 

4. This cohesion imposed on the socii consists, in effect, of not 
admitting among themselves the validity of the right of 
death, which they can exercise over others, but of 
recognizing among themselves an absolute right of free 
disposal; each must be able to belong to the other. 

5. Cf. the episode of the volcano at the end of Juliette (Pauvert 
edition, Paris, 1954), Vol. VI, pp. 31-33. 

6. “One would have said that Nature, weary of her own works, 
was ready to mingle all the elements together in order to 
force them into new forms.” Ibid., p. 270. 


318 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


Michel Foucault was bom in Poitiers, France, in 1926. He 
lectured in many universities throughout the world and served as 
director at the Institut Fran^ais in Hamburg, and the Institut de 
Philosophic at the Faculte des Fettres in the University of 
Clermont-Ferrand. He wrote frequently for French newspapers 
and reviews, and held a chair at France’s most prestigious 
institution, the College de France. 

In addition to Madness and Civilization , his works available in 
Vintage are The Order of Things, The Birth of the Clinic , Discipline 
and Punish , and The History of Sexuality. 

Michel Foucault died in June 1984. 


319 



BOOKS BY 

MICHEL FOUCAULT 


“The brilliance of his style, his irony, and his ease of paradox 
endear Foucault’s writing to sophisticated readers.” 

—Washington Post Book World 


THE ORDER OF THINGS 
AN ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 
With vast erudition, Foucault cuts across disciplines and reaches 
back into the seventeenth century to trace the great rift that 
separates classical systems of knowledge from their modern 
counterparts. 

“An extraordinary range of information and imagination, and its 
theses ought to be taken note of and learned from.” 

—New Republic 

Philosophy/History/0-679-75335-4 


THE BIRTH OF THE CLINIC 
AN ARCHAEOLOGY OF MEDICAL PERCEPTION 
In The Birth of the Clinic , Foucault shows how our definition of 
pure science is shaped by social and cultural attitudes, and he 
sheds new light on the origins of our current notions of health 
and sickness, life and death. 

“Learned [and] rewarding.” 

—The New York Times Book Review 
Philosophy/History/0-679-75334-6 


320 



MADNESS AND CIVILIZATION 
A HISTORY OF INSANITY IN THE AGE OF REASON 
What does it mean to be mad? In Madness and Civilization , 
Foucault examines the archaeology of madness in the West from 
1500 to 1800—from the Middle Ages, when insanity was 
considered part of everyday life, to the time when such people 
began to be considered a threat. 

“Superb scholarship rendered with artistry.” 

—The Nation 

History/Psychology/0-679-72110-X 

THE HISTORY OF SEXUALITY, VOLUME I 
AN INTRODUCTION 

The dazzling, iconoclastic exploration of modern sexual history 
that has become required reading for students of philosophy, 
psychology, and cultural history. 

“A disconcerting but ultimately compelling reversal of accepted 
ideas.” 

—Richard Poirier, The New York Times Book Review 
Philosophy/0-679-72469-9 


THE HISTORY OF SEXUALITY, VOLUME II 
THE USE OF PLEASURE 

Foucault’s brilliant sequel to The History of Sexuality, Volume /, 
analyzes the way sexuality was perceived in ancient Greece and 
discusses why sexual experience became a moral issue in the 
West. 

“Breathtaking throughout ... a tour de force.” 

—Boston Globe 

Philosophy/0-679-75122-1 


321 



HISTORY OF SEXUALITY, VOLUME III 
THE CARE OF THE SELF 

The third and final volume of Michel Foucault’s widely 
acclaimed examination of “the experience of sexuality in Western 
society.” 

“A monument to the audacity and ambition of modern French 
scholarship and philosophy. He leaves us in his debt.” 

—San Francisco Chronicle 

History/Psychology/0-394-74115-2 

DISCIPLINE AND PUNISH 
THE BIRTH OF THE PRISON 
In this brilliant study, Foucault sweeps aside centuries of sterile 
debate about prison reform and gives a highly provocative 
account of how penal institutions and the power to punish 
became a part of our lives. 

“Must be reckoned with by humanists, social scientists and 
political activists.” 

—The New York Times Book Review 
Philosophy/Criminology/0-394-72767-3 


VINTAGE 



BOOKS 


322 



