Asian governments, notably Thailand, to produce a Vast and unprece¬ 
dented 5 campaign of propaganda against the Khmer Rouge/ 5100 



290 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


To buttress this claim, Shawcross provides what purports to be a 
quote—but without citing an identifiable source, for two good reasons. 
First, the quote does not exist, 10 * although even his version undermines 
his basic claim, with its reference to “the grim reality” of Cambodia 
under Khmer Rouge rule. Second, the source of the manufactured 
quote is a work published in November 1979, almost a year after the 
fall of the Pol Pot regime. To cite the date would have raised the 
question of how this “fervent and frequent” expression of skepticism 
could have intimidated governments and the media from 1975 through 
1978. Furthermore, we made it crystal clear that the record of atrocities 
was “gruesome,” perhaps even at the level of the most outlandish 
fabrications. 

Note that Shawcross could have cited real examples of “skepticism”; 
for example, the skepticism of State Department analysts at the height 
of the furor over Cambodia, or the retrospective comments of Douglas 
Pike and others cited earlier (pp. 265-66), or the comments of journal¬ 
ists during phase II who were willing to conclude only that refugee 
accounts “suggest that the Khmer Rouge is finding it hard to govern 
the country except by coercion” and “even suggest that terror is being 
employed as a system of government,” noting that refugees “did not 
appear to be in a sorry condition” and that if the Khmer Rouge are 
perpetrating an “atrocity,” as claimed, then “the atrocity did not begin 
in April [1975]—it simply entered its sixth year” (William Shaw¬ 
cross). 102 But the truth plainly would not have served the purposes of 
this exercise. 103 

Perhaps there was some other example of this “fervent and frequent” 
expression of skepticism that silenced the West. Shawcross is wise to 
avoid examples, because as he knows well, his primary source, Pon- 
chaud, went out of his way to praise Chomsky for “the responsible 
attitude and precision of thought” shown in what he had written on 
Cambodia, referring to our 1977 review of his book cited earlier and 
unpublished correspondence he had seen, which exhausts anything 
relevant that appears during the DK period. 104 So Shawcross would 
have us believe that a single 1977 article in The Nation silenced the 
West, an article in which, furthermore, we praised the book written by 
his primary source, Ponchaud, as “serious and worth reading,” with its 
“grisly account of what refugees have reported to him about the bar¬ 
barity of their treatment at the hands of the Khmer Rouge,” and stated 
that we are in no position to draw any conclusion about the actual 
extent of the atrocities, in conformity to State Department specialists 
and other informed sources at the time. 

To be clear, in our one article, to which Ponchaud alludes, we did 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (l I): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 29I 


express some “skepticism*” not only about claims that had already been 
withdrawn as fabrications but also about others that remained to be 
assessed* Thus in reviewing Ponchaud, we expressed skepticism about 
his estimate of casualties caused by American bombing* which appeared 
to us excessive and possibly based on misinterpretation of figures he 
cited; and we raised questions about some of the quotes attributed to 
the Khmer Rouge on which he (and later others) crucially relied, but 
which he had presented in very different forms on different occasions— 
and which he later conceded to have no basis whatsoever. 105 It is 
noteworthy that our skepticism about charges against the United 
States, although based merely on suspicion* has elicited no comment , 
while our skepticism about charges against the Khmer Rouge* which 
was based on textual evidence and* as it later turned out, was much 
understated* has aroused great fury in what Vickery describes as “in¬ 
competent* even dishonest” and “often scurrilous” commentary. 106 
The differential reaction is easily explained. It is taken for granted that 
U.S. actions must be recounted with scrupulous care and in nuanced 
manner* so our insistence on this is simply what is to be expected, 
meriting no comment. {We agree.) In contrast, the acts of official ene¬ 
mies merit no such scruples* and it is an unforgivable crime to question 
propaganda exercises undertaken in the service of power. 

Notice that even had the “skepticism” of “the Western left” to which 
Shawcross alludes existed to any significant degree, the idea that this 
could have the consequences he describes, coming from people sys¬ 
tematically barred from the media and mainstream discussion* is a 
construction of such audacity that one must admire its creator. Shaw¬ 
cross argues further that this alleged “left-wing skepticism” not only 
silenced Western media and governments but also prevented any mean¬ 
ingful Western response to Khmer Rouge atrocities. This thesis is too 
ludicrous to merit comment* and we can assess Shawcross’s seriousness 
in advancing it by turning to his own proposals at the time as to what 
could be done* recalling that he had easy access to the mainstream 
media throughout. We find not a word suggesting what might be 
done 107 —for the simple reason that neither he nor anyone else could 
think of anything useful. The situation was, of course, quite different 
during phase I of the genocide* or with regard to Timor during phase 
II and since, and in innumerable other cases where Sh aweross's charge 
would indeed be valid* We learn a good deal about “holocaust and the 
modem conscience” by observing this exercise and the reaction it 
elicited* 
