deteriorates ex post facto and looks most unfavorable compared with 
the humanistic and sensitive one now in power! This droll pattern of 
identical apologetics for each successor terrorist, and ex post denigra¬ 
tion of the one ousted, is an Orwellian process that the Western press 
associates with totalitarian states, but it happens here. And it can only 
occur if the mass media are cooperative. They must be willing to 
downplay or ignore the large-scale murders going on in Guatemala in 
the first place. In that context, the serial apologetics, the lies defending 
each murderer, and the mind-boggling hypocrisy will hardly be news¬ 
worthy. 

Given the U,S. role in originating and sustaining the Guatemalan 
counterinsurgency state, and the fact that that state is dedicated to 
blocking the growth of popular organizations (i.e., “anti-Communist” 
in Orwellian rhetoric) and has a strong U.S. business presence, a propa¬ 
ganda model would anticipate a lack of media interest in its “unworthy” 
victims and an evasion of the U.S. role in its evolution and practices. 
We would expect reports on Guatemala put out by Amnesty Interna¬ 
tional and other human-rights groups to be downplayed or ignored, 
despite their spectacular data and horrifying stories. This is a strong test 
of the model, as the number of civilians murdered between 1978 and 
1985 may have approached 100,000, with a style of killing reminiscent 
of Pol Pot. As AI pointed out in 1981: 

The bodies of the victims have been found piled up in ravines, 
dumped at roadsides or buried in mass graves. Thousands bore the 
scars of torture, and death had come to most by strangling with 
a garrotte, by being suffocated in rubber hoods or by being shot 
in the head, 90 

The expectations of a propaganda model are fully realized in this case. 
Referring to our table 2-1 comparison of media treatment of twenty- 
three religious victims in Guatemala with the coverage accorded Fopie- 
luszko, only four of the twenty-three were ever mentioned by name in 
our media sample, and the twenty-three taken together had approxi¬ 
mately one-twentieth of the space in the New York Times that the 
newspaper of record gave to Popieluszko. In the case ^f the murder in 
Guatemala of the American priest Rev. Stanley Rothcr, the New York 
Times reported on August 5,1981, in a tiny back-page article, that three 
men had been arrested for questioning in the shooting. What was the 
outcome of the arrests? Were the arrested persons tried? Readers of the 
Times will never know, and the Guatemalan government did not have 



76 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


to suffer the embarrassment and pressure of the press raising questions 
in this or any of the remaining twenty-two Guatemalan cases. 

Along with the minuscule attention to the murder of Guatemalan 
priests, the details of the killings were brief, and no sense of outrage 
was generated or sustained. 91 The few lengthier articles never discuss 
the role of the 1954 coup and the long training and supply relationship 
of the United States to the Guatemalan police and army; 92 rather, they 
almost invariably put the killings in the format of a civil war with 
unexplained atrocities of extremists of the right and left (see “Arch¬ 
bishop Oscar Romero, 5 * p, 48}. An AP dispatch in the New York Times 
of May 16,1981, is entitled “Four Guatemalans Slain in Leftist-Rightist 
Rivalry/ 5 The article, which reports on the murder of one of our 
twenty-three priests, the Reverend Carlos Galvez Galindo, says: “The 
attacks appeared to be related to the long struggle for power between 
leftists and rightists/ 5 A UPI dispatch in the Times of July 29, 1981, 
reporting on the murder of Rev, Stanley Rother, also relates the attack 
to “right-wing extremists 55 —not the Guatemalan government. 

Time has Rother and his Guatemalan villagers “caught in the middle 
of an undeclared civil war. . . .” 93 Time never explains the roots of the 
civil war, nor the crucial role of the United States in refusing to allow 
peaceful social change and installing the institutions of permanent 
counterrevolution. Time does, in most unusual fashion, point out that 
the government was responsible for the “overwhelming majority’ 5 of the 
killings, and even more exceptionally, it cites Amnesty InternationaPs 
evidence that the paramilitary death squads are an arm of the govern¬ 
ment. But the article fails to give illustrations of the scope and quality 
of the murders, and retreats, as noted, to the civil-war rationale. Even 
more compromising is its framing of the U.S. policy debate. According 
to Time ? “Yet Guatemala confronts the Reagan administration with one 
of its toughest foreign policy challenges: on one hand, the country is 
viewed as a victim of Cuban-sponsored insurgency, needing U.S. sup¬ 
port; on the other, the government obviously violates human rights/* 
The dichotomy offered by Time is a bit uneven: the Cuban sponsorship 
is a Cold War ploy for which no evidence has ever been given, but it 
provides a convenient propaganda framework that is regularly deployed 
by the State Department to divert attention from its support of mass 
murderers. Time thus elevates it to equality with a real and extremely 
serious charge—and without an honest citation even to a political hack. 
The “on the other hand 5 * is, despite the “obviously, 5 * a gross understate¬ 
ment. The Reagan administration chose to support and provide regular 
apologetics for a genocidal government that was using a policy of 
massacre to destroy a purely indigenous revolt. The “challenge” for the 



WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS JJ 


Reagan administration—quite different from that portrayed by Time — 
was how to sell the support of mass murder. Time did its little bit by 
