market* 

With the media's help, the chemical industry has also gained wide 
acceptance of its view that chemicals should be evaluated individually 
on the basis of an analysis of their risks to individuals and individual 
tolerances* But it is very hard to measure such risks and tolerances for 
humans—controlled experiments are not possible, damage may show up 
only after many years, the forms of damage are hard to know in advance, 
chemicals may interact with others in the environment, they may be bio- 




INTRODUCTION Xlvil 


accumulative, and the breakdown products of chemicals may have their 
own dangers. Furthermore, if thousands of chemicals enter the environ¬ 
ment, many long-lasting, bioaccumulative, and interacting with other 
chemicals, a public policy that ignores their additive and interactive ef¬ 
fects on people and the environment is deeply flawed and irresponsible. 

Policy based on the “precautionary principle,” bitterly opposed by the 
chemical industry, with the support of the U.S. government, 134 would 
not allow chemicals ro enter the environment without full testing, would 
prohibit the use of chemicals that accumulate in human tissues and 
whose breakdown products are threatening or unknown, and would 
compel The use of nonthreatening alternatives for untested and known- 
to-be-risky chemicals where such alternatives can be found or developed 
at reasonable cost. 135 

In successfully avoiding application of the precautionary principle, 
industry spokespersons have argued that the existing system is based on 
“sound science.” Bur science does not tell us that industry has any right 
to put chemicals into the environment that have any risk at all, let alone 
telling us what risks are acceptable—these are political decisions. Fur¬ 
thermore, if the chemicals in the environment have not been tested for all 
the variables that are relevant to social choices, such as their long-term 
effects on immune systems and reproduction as well as any cancer threat, 
and the effects of their breakdown products on the environment—and 
none of them have been so tested—the political, not scientific, basis of 
“sound science 55 is evident. 

The chemical industry has produced, and long denied any harm from, 
innumerable products—from tetraethyl lead in gasoline and PCBs in 
batteries to asbestos, DDT, and Agent Orange—that are now well estab¬ 
lished as seriously harmful, only withdrawing them (often only from 
domestic use) under overwhelming legal and regulatory pressure. For 
the products they have wanted to sell, they have always found scientists 
who would testify to their harmlessness (or that claims of harm were 
not scientifically proven). There has been a consistent sharp difference 
between the results of industry-sponsored science and those of inde¬ 
pendent researchers working the same terrain. 136 And there have been 
numerous cases of fraud in industry testing, industry use of testing labs 
that arranged the data to find industry products acceptable, and political 
manipulation to weaken regulatory standards. 

Despite these industry abuses of science, the media have largely ac¬ 
cepted the industry's claim that it supports “sound science,” in contrast 
with its critics* use of “junk science.” From 1996 through September 
1998, 258 articles in mainstream newspapers used the phrase “junk sci¬ 
ence but only 21, or 8 percent, used it to refer to corporate abuses of 



Xlviii INTRODUCTION! 


science, whereas 160, or 62 percent, applied it to science used by envi¬ 
ronmentalists, other corporate critics, or tort lawyers suing corporations 
( 77 ; or 30 percent, didn’t fit either of these categories ). 138 In short, the 
media have internalized industry's self-legitimizing usage, just as they 
have normalized a status quo of caveat emptor (buyer beware) rather 
than of safety first. 

The media have also regularly gotten on board in dismissing concerns 
about chemical threats as unwarranted “scares,” such as the alleged scares 
over dioxin and the danger of Alar on apples. But these and other scares 
often turn out to be based on genuine health hazards. 13 ^ Meanwhile, the 
media rarely report and examine in any depth the frequent evidence of 
the inadequacy of regulation and testing and of the real costs of chemical¬ 
ization of the environment. 140 For example, the International Joint Com¬ 
mission (IJC), a joint Canadian-U.S. venture dating back to 1978, was 
given the formidable task of trying to halt the flow of toxic chemicals into 
the Great Lakes. It reports each year that it is failing, and since 1992 has 
called for the ending of the manufacture of chlorine as essential to fulfill¬ 
ing its task. The national media virtually ignore this appeal, and the IJC’s 
US. cochairman Gordon Durnil has remarked that “we have a societal 
problem about how to deal with this, but 90 percent of the population 
doesn't even know there is anything to worry about” 141 We believe that 
the propaganda model helps understand this lack of knowledge. 

In the health insurance controversy of 1992-93, the media's refusal 
to take the single-payer option seriously, despite apparent widespread 
public support and the effectiveness of the system in Canada, served well 
the interests of the insurance and medical service complex. 142 The un¬ 
critical media reporting and commentary on the alleged urgency of fiscal 
restraint and a balanced budget in the years 1992-96 fit well the business 
community's desire to reduce the social budget and weaken regula¬ 
tion. 143 The media's gullibility in accepting the claim of a Social Security 
