INTRODUCTION XXV 


mation of a government the administration was trying to overthrow. The 
mainstream media cooperated, finding the Salvadoran election a “step 
toward democracy” and the Nicaraguan election a “sham,” despite the 
fact that electoral conditions were far more compatible with an honest 
election in Nicaragua Than in El Salvador. We demonstrate that the 
media applied a remarkable dual standard to the two elections in accord 
with The government's propaganda needs. 

This same bias is apparent in the press treatment of more recent eiec- 
tions in Cambodia, Yugoslavia, Kenya, Mexico, Russia, Turkey, and 
Uruguay. Cambodia and Yugoslavia were the only two of these seven 
ruled by a party strongly objectionable to U.S, policy-makers, and it is in 
these cases that the New York Times warned of serious problems: As re¬ 
gards Cambodia, it asserted that “flawed elections are worse than none,” 
and that “the international community must proceed cautiously, lest a 
rigged election give Mr. Hun Sen a veneer of legitimacy” 42 In reporting 
on the Yugoslavian election of September 2000, in which U.S. officials 
intervened openly to prevent the reelection of Slobodan Milosevic, the 
Times and media in general repeatedly warned of the possibility of fraud 
and a rigged election. 43 In the case of Kenya, where U.S. policy toward 
the ruling government was ambivalent, here also the Times was skeptical 
of election quality, noting that “holding elections is not enough to assure 
democratic government” and stressing the need for “an independent 
electoral commission less bound to political parties” and “independent 
broadcast media, allowing opposition voices to be heard outside election 
periods.” 44 

But in the other four elections, organized and won by governments 
strongly favored by the U.S. State Department, there were no suggestions 
that “flawed elections are worse than none” and no featuring of the threat 
of fraud; the importance of an independent electoral commission and 
broadcast media was not pressed, and in each case the election was found 
to be a step toward democracy and hence legitimizing. 

In the case of Mexico, long subject to one party (PRI) rule, but sup¬ 
ported by the U.S. government over the past several decades, the Times 
has regularly found the Mexican elections encouraging, in contrast with 
past fraudulent ones which, at the time, the editors also contrasted favor¬ 
ably with those in the more distant past! It has featured expressions of 
benevolent intent and downplayed structural defects and abuses. Thus, 
in its first editorial on the 1988 election that brought Carlos Salinas de 
Gortari to power, the Times noted that prior elections were corrupt (the 
PRI “manipulated patronage, the news media and the ballot box”), but it 
stressed that PRI candidate Salinas “contends” that political reform is 
urgent and “calls for clean elections” 45 The editors questioned whether 



xxvi introduction 


“his party” will “heed his pleas,” a process of distancing the favored can¬ 
didate from responsibility for any abuses to come. In the editorials that 
followed, the Times did not suggest possible ongoing electoral fraud, 
“manipulated patronage " or media controls and bias, although this elec¬ 
tion was famous for a convenient “computer breakdown” in the election 
aftermath, which turned Carlos Salinas from an expected loser into a 
winner. Just three years later, however, at the time of the 1991 election, 
the editors stated that “as long as anyone can remember, Mexican elec¬ 
tions have been massively fraudulent” as it prepared readers for new 
promises of a cleanup. 46 But all through this period and later, the Times 
(and its media rivals) did not focus on fraud or call these elections rigged; 
in both news stories and editorials they portrayed these deeply flawed 
elections as steps toward democracy and legitimizing. 

In the 1983 Turkish election, held under military rule, with harsh 
censorship and only three parties “led by politicians sympathetic to the 
military government” allowed to run, the Times found that “Turkey Ap¬ 
proaches Democracy.” 47 Similarly, in Uruguay’s 1984 election, under 
another military regime that jailed the leading opposition candidate and 
also refused to allow a second major candidate to run, but organized by a 
government approved by the US. State Department, the Times once 
again found that “Uruguay is resuming its democratic vocation . . . the 
generals are yielding to the infectious resurgence of democracy in much 
of Latin America ” 48 

The Russian election of 1996 was important to the United States and 
its allies, as Boris Yeltsin, the ruler who was carrying out their favored 
policies of privatization and the integration of Russia into the global 
financial system, was seriously threatened with defeat. The Yeltsin gov¬ 
ernment had presided over a 50 percent fall in national output and large 
income declines for 90 percent of the population, while the hugely 
corrupt privatization process provided windfalls to a small minority, in¬ 
cluding an important criminal class. The social welfare and health care 
systems had disintegrated under Yeltsin’s rule, contributing to a startling 
rise in infectious diseases and mortality rates. Just before the 1996 elec¬ 
tion campaign, Yeltsin’s popularity rating was 8 percent That he could 
win reelection in such circumstances suggests—and reflects—a seriously 
flawed election. 

However, with the Yeltsin regime strongly backed by the U.S. govern¬ 
ment and its Western allies, the New York Times once again found this 
election “A Victory for Russian Democracy,” and so did the US. main¬ 
stream media in general. For that paper of record, electoral flaws were 
slighted or ignored, and its editors declared the very fact of holding 
an “imperfect” election “a remarkable achievement.” 49 The same bias 

