This bias is politically advantageous to U.S, policy-makers, for focus¬ 
ing on victims of enemy states shows those states to be wicked and 
deserving of U.S. hostility; while ignoring US. and client-state victims 
allows ongoing U.S. policies to proceed more easily, unburdened by the 
interference of concern over the politically inconvenient victims. It is not 
a credible reply that difficulty in getting evidence on “unworthy 1 ’ victims 
can account for the application of such a gross double standard, as an 
alternative press with meager resources has been able to gather a great 
deal of material on their mistreatment from highly credible sources, such 
as major human rights organizations and church representatives . 27 Fur¬ 
thermore, only political factors can explain the differences in quality of 
treatment of worthy and unworthy victims noted throughout this book, 
illustrated in chapter 2 by the more antiseptic reporting of the abuse of 
unworthy victims (even U.S. women raped and murdered in El Salvador) 
and the greater indignation and search for responsibility at the top in the 
case of worthy victims. 

That the same massive political bias displayed earlier in the coverage 
of Popieluszko and the hundred religious victims in Latin America con¬ 
tinues today is suggested by the media’s usage of the word “genocide” in 
the 1990 s, as shown in the accompanying table. “Genocide” is an invidi¬ 
ous word that officials apply readily to cases of victimization in enemy 
states, but rarely if ever to similar or worse cases of victimization by the 
United States itself or allied regimes. Thus, with Saddam Hussein and 
Iraq having been U.S. targets in the 1990 s, whereas Turkey has been an 
ally and client and the United States its major arms supplier as it engaged 
in its severe ethnic cleansing of Kurds during those years, we find former 
U.S. Ambassador Peter Galbraith stating that “while Turkey represses its 
own Kurds, its cooperation is essential to an American-led mission to 
protect Iraq’s Kurds from renewed genocide at the hands of Saddam 
Hussein .” 28 Turkey’s treatment of its Kurds was in no way less murder¬ 
ous than Iraq’s treatment of Iraqi Kurds, but for Galbraith, Turkey only 
“represses,” while Iraq engages in “genocide.” 


L 




INTRODUCTION XXI 


Mainstream Media Usage 
of “Genocide” for 

Kosovo, East Timor, Turkey, and Iraq 1 



