“threat” were placed at the center of public attention. The Nicaraguan 
election was nor discussed. LASA points out that “The final results of 
Nicaragua’s election were not even reported by most of the interna¬ 
tional media. They were literally buried under an avalanche of alarmist 
news reports” (p. 31). LASA concludes that the Nicaraguan electoral 




legitimizing versus meaningless third world elections 139 


process was manipulated* as the U.S. government claims* but by the 
U.S, government itself in its efforts to discredit an election that it did 
not want to take place. The Salvadoran and Guatemalan elections 
successfully legitimized the U.S.-backed regimes* at least for American 
elite opinion. The far more honest Nicaraguan election failed to accom¬ 
plish this, thanks to the loyal service of the media. 


3.9* THE ROLE OF OFFICIAL 
‘‘OBSERVERS*’ IN 
REINFORCING A 
PROPAGANDA LINE 

Official observers provide a perfect example of the use of government- 
controlled “experts'* and “pseudo-events 5 * to attract media attention 
and channel it in the direction of the propaganda line. And they regu¬ 
larly succeed in doing this in demonstration elections, no matter how 
brief their stay and foolish their comments (see appendix 1). The media 
take it for granted that official observers are newsworthy: they are 
notables, their selection by the government from “reputable” institu¬ 
tions adds to their credibility, and their observations will have effects 
on opinion and policy. This rationale is in the nature of a self-fulfilling 
prophecy; they have effects only because the media accord them atten¬ 
tion. As the official observers reliably commend the elections as fair 
without the slightest attention to basic conditions, the media's regular 
use of these observers for comments on election quality violates norms 
of substantive objectivity in the same manner as the use of any straight 
government handout by the Times or Pravda . 110 

The Nicaraguan election was remarkable for the number of foreign 
observers and observer teams. We pointed out earlier that Time men¬ 
tioned 450 foreign observers, but the magazine failed to cite any one 
of them (relying instead, and characteristically, on State Department 
handouts). As we saw, the State Department was able to get the media 
to follow its agenda, even though this involved them in a blatant rever¬ 
sal of the criteria they had employed the same year in El Salvador and 
Guatemala. It was also able to induce the media to disregard the out¬ 
come of the Nicaraguan election, with the help of the diversionary 
