struction of the only mass-based political party—as a proof that we 
were right to defend South Vietnam by demolishing it, thus encourag¬ 
ing the Indonesian generals to prevent any rot from spreading there. In 
1972, the United States backed the overthrow of Philippine democracy, 
thus averting the threat of national capitalism there with a terror-and- 
torture state on the preferred Latin American model. A move toward 
democracy in Thailand in 1973 evoked some concern, prompting a 
reduction in economic aid and increase in military aid in preparation 



246 manufacturing consent 


for the military coup that took place with U.S. support in 1976. Thai¬ 
land has had a particularly important role in the U.S. regional system 
since 1954, when the National Security Council laid out a plan for 
subversion and eventual aggression throughout Southeast Asia, in re¬ 
sponse to the Geneva Accords, with Thailand serving as its “focal 
point” and, subsequently, as a major base for the U.S* attacks on 
Vietnam and Laos. m In his personal Times retrospective. Pentagon 
Papers director Leslie Gelb observes that ten years after the war ended, 
“the position of the United States in Asia is stronger” than at any time 
since World War II, despite “the defeat of South Vietnam,” quoting 
“policy analysts” from government and scholarship who observe that 
“Thailand and Indonesia , . . were able to get themselves together 
politically, economically and militarily to beat down Communist insur¬ 
gencies,” in the manner just indicated, as were the Philippines and 
South Korea, also graced with a U.S.-backed military coup in 1972* 179 
The business press had drawn the same conclusions years earlier, dur¬ 
ing the latter stages of the war* ls0 

In short, the United States won a regional victory, and even a sub¬ 
stantial local victory in Indochina, left in ruins. The U.S. victory was 
particularly significant within South Vietnam, where the peasant-based 
revolutionary forces were decimated and the rural society was demol¬ 
ished* “One hard-core revolutionary district just outside Saigon, Cu 
Chi,” Paul Quinn-Judge observes, “sent 16,000 men and women to fight 
for the National Liberation Front. Some 9,900 did not return.” Much 
the same was true throughout the South. “The deaths left a major 
political gap for the new regime,” he adds* “The south was stripped of 
the trained, disciplined and presumably committed young cadres who 
would have formed the backbone of the present administration* In 
many areas the losses were near complete- - * * And the casualties put 
further strains on the state’s limited financial and organisation capaci- 
ties.” m The U.S. victory over the overwhelmingly rural society of 
South Vietnam, always the primary enemy, laid the basis for the take¬ 
over by North Vietnam (as anticipated years earlier in the much- 
derided peace-movement literature), 182 allowing American hypocrites 
to “prove” that this predictable consequence of the war they supported 
shows that it was a just “defense of South Vietnam” against northern 
aggressors. In the cities, swollen with millions of refugees, the lucky and 
the more corrupt survived on an American dole at a level that had no 
relation to the now-demolished productive capacity of the country, 
leaving another near-insoluble problem that can conveniently be 
blamed on the Communists. The revolutionary forces had gained vic¬ 
tory in many rural areas by the time of the outright U.S* invasion. 






THE INDOCHINA WARS (i): VIETNAM 247 


largely through their appeal to the peasantry* as documented in the 
more serious scholarly work from sources in or close to the U.S. gov¬ 
ernment (“The Early Stages*” p, 186). But “many of the conclusions [of 
this work] have been invalidated by the events after Tet,” New York 
Times Asia correspondent Fox Butterfield observes* a coy reference to 
the fact that this political success was overturned by the U.S. outburst 
of savagery in the post-Tet mass murder operations. 183 

That the United States suffered a “defeat” in Indochina is a natural 
perception on the part of those of limitless ambition* who understand 
“defeat” to mean the achievement only of major goals* while certain 
minor ones remain beyond our grasp. The perception of an unqualified 
U.S. “defeat” in the media retrospectives and similar commentary is 
understandable in part in these terms* in part in terms of the alleged 
goal of “defending freedom” developed in official propaganda and 
relayed by the ideological institutions. 

Postwar U.S. policy has been designed to ensure that the victory is 
maintained by maximizing suffering and oppression in Indochina, 
which then evokes further gloating here. Since “the destruction is 
mutual*” as is readily demonstrated by a stroll through New York* 
Boston, Vinh, Quang Ngai Province* and the Plain of Jars* we are 
entitled to deny reparations* aid* and trade, and to block development 
funds. The extent of U.S. sadism is noteworthy, as is the (null) reaction 
to it. In 1977* when India tried to send a hundred buffalo to Vietnam 
ro replenish the herds destroyed by U.S. violence, the United States 
threatened to cancel “food-for-peace” aid, while the press featured 
photographs of peasants in Cambodia pulling plows as proof of Com¬ 
munist barbarity; the photographs in this case were probable fabrica¬ 
tions of Thai intelligence* but authentic ones could* no doubt* have 
been obtained throughout Indochina. The Carter administration even 
denied rice to Laos (despite a cynical pretense to the contrary), where 
the agricultural system was destroyed by U.S. terror bombing. Oxfam 
America was not permitted to send ten solar pumps to Cambodia for 
