


WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS 63 


deaths,” but her article gave no details whatsoever on the medical 
evidence* 


2.4.2. Lack of indignation and 
insistent demands for justice 

In the Popieluszko case, the press conveyed the impression of intoler¬ 
able outrage that demanded immediate rectification. In the case of the 
murder of the four American women, while the media asserted and 
quoted government officials that this was a brutal and terrible act, it was 
not declared intolerable, and the media did not insist on (or quote 
people who demanded) justice. The media relied heavily r on "senior 
officials” of the U*S* and Salvadoran governments, who expressed a 
more resigned view of the situation and were prepared to allow the 
Salvadoran system of justice to work things out* Correspondingly, the 
media also moved into a philosophical vein—the women, as Time 
points out, were “victims of the mindless, increasing violence” of El 
Salvador (Dec, 15, 1980)* With Popieluszko, it was live government 
officials who committed the crime, not blind forces (that are hard to 
bring to book)* 

Even the funeral and memorial services for the women in the United 
Stares were not allowed to serve as an occasion for outrage and a 
demand for justice* For the most part, they were ignored and sup¬ 
pressed* The New York Times (Dec* 8,1981) gave a tiny, back-page, UPI 
account of the memorial service for Sister Dorothy Kazel, featuring the 
apolitical statement by Bishop Anthony M* Pilla that “The life of a 
missionary has never been easy or glamorous*” 

We must consider, too, that as Ambassador Kirkpatrick indicated, 
the victims may have been asking for it. As Newsweek observed (Dec, 
15,1980), “The violence in El Salvador is likely to focus with increasing 
ferocity on the Roman Catholic Church* Many priests and nuns advo¬ 
cate reform, and some of them are militant leftists* Such sentiments 
mean trouble, even for more moderate members of the clergy, 5 * (Note 
here also the impersonality of “the violence”—nowhere in the article 
is there a suggestion that the U*S.-backed government initiated, and 
was doing the bulk of, the murdering*) In the case of Popieluszko, by 
contrast, the media never once suggested that he was a regrettable 
victim of escalating conflict between the state and rebellious forces (or 
between East and West)* That situation was much simpler than the one 
in El Salvador: Popieluszko was murdered by officials of the state, and 



64 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


this was intolerable. The complexities and resort to philosophical in¬ 
anities about unallocable “violence” are reserved for deaths in the 
provinces. 


2*4.3. The lack of zeal in the 
search for villainy at the top 

As we saw earlier* in the Popieluszko case the mass media eagerly* 
aggressively* and on a daily basis sought and pointed to evidence of 
top-level involvement in the killing. In the case of the killings of the 
four women* we can observe a completely different approach. Here the 
media found it extremely difficult to locate Salvadoran government 
involvement in the murders, even with evidence staring them in the 
face. Their investigatory zeal was modest* and they were happy to 
follow the leads of (“Trust me”) Duarte and U.S. officials as the case 
unfolded. They played dumb. The Salvadoran army and security forces 
had been killing Salvadorans, in the same way they had killed the four 
women* for months. What is more* the churches with which the women 
were connected had been recently threatened by the army. More direct 
evidence was that local peasants had been forced to bury the bodies by 
the local military. But the media did not use this information to help 
them find the locus of the murders. 

The initial line of the U.S. and Salvadoran governments was that 
there was no proof of military involvement* although the military's' 
concealment of the bodies was not proper. A statement issued by the 
junta on December 8 claimed that the murderers were “terrorists of the 
extreme right,” 55 and Duane reiterated this view to the press, which 
passed it along. In keeping with the government line* twenty days after 
the murders* the New York Times still spoke only of “unidentified 
assailants,” although the leads to the National Guard were already 
plentiful, and it repeated the Rogers report finding that the security 
forces may have tried to “conceal the deaths” after the bodies had been 
found. 56 

Gradually* so much evidence seeped out to show that the women had 
been murdered by members of the National Guard that the involve¬ 
ment of government forces could no longer be evaded. A two-part 
process of “damage limitation” ensued, expounded by Salvadoran and 
U.S. officials and faithfully reflected in the media. One was a distinction 
between the government and the National Guard. In the Popieluszko 
case, the reader was never aiiowed to forget that the murdering poiice 


