national political police were only one element of government programs 
extending over many administrations to deter independent political 
action* stir up violence in the ghettos* and undermine the popular 
movements that were beginning to engage sectors of the generally 
marginalized public in the arena of decision-making. 2 These coven and 
illegal programs were revealed in court cases and elsewhere during the 
Watergate period, but they never entered the congressional proceedings 




300 manufacturing consent 


and received only limited media attention. Even the complicity of the 
FBI in the police assassination of a Black Panther organizer in Chicago 
was not a scandal* in marked contrast to Nixon’s “enemies list,” which 
identified powerful people who were denigrated in private but suffered 
no consequences. As we have noted, the U.S. role in initiating and 
carrying out the first phase of "the decade of the genocide” in Cam¬ 
bodia entered the Watergate proceedings only marginally: not because 
hundreds of thousands of Cambodians were slaughtered in the course 
of a major war crime, but because Congress was not properly notified, 
so that its privileges were infringed, and even this was considered too 
slight an infraction to enter the final charges. What was true of Con¬ 
gress was also true of the media and their investigative reporting that 
"helped force a President from office” (Lewis) in what is held to be a 
most remarkable display of media independence, or arrogance, depend¬ 
ing on one’s point of view. 

History has been kind enough to contrive for us a “controlled experi¬ 
ment” to determine just what was at stake during the Watergate period, 
when the confrontational stance of the media reached its peak. The 
answer is clear and precise: powerful groups are capable of defending 
themselves, not surprisingly; and by media standards, it is a scandal 
when their position and rights are threatened. By contrast, as long as 
illegalities and violations of democratic substance are confined to mar¬ 
ginal groups or distant victims of U.S. military attack, or result in a 
diffused cost imposed on the general population, media opposition is 
muted or absent altogether. 3 This is why Nixon could go so far, lulled 
into a false sense of security precisely because the watchdog only 
barked when he began to threaten the privileged. 

Exactly the same lessons were taught by the Iran-contra scandals 
and the media reaction to them. 4 It was a scandal when the Reagan 
administration was found to have violated congressional prerogatives 
during the Iran-contra affair, but not when it dismissed with contempt 
the judgment of the International Court of Justice that the United 
States was engaged in the “unlawful use of force” and violation of 
treaties—that is, violation of the supreme law of the land and custom¬ 
