
24 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


mind.” By the sales effort* including the dissemination of the correct 
ideas to “thousands of newspapers*” it is possible to keep debate 
“within its proper perspective.” 91 

In accordance with this formula* during the 1970s and early 1980s a 
string of institutions was created and old ones were activated to the end 
of propagandizing the corporate viewpoint. Many hundreds of intellec¬ 
tuals were brought to these institutions* where their work was funded 
and their outputs were disseminated to the media by a sophisticated 
propaganda effort. 92 The corporate funding and dear ideological pur¬ 
pose in the overall effort had no discernible effect on the credibility of 
the intellectuals so mobilized; on the contrary* the funding and pushing 
of Their ideas catapaulted them into the press. 

As an illustration of how the funded experts preempt space in the 
media* table 1-4 describes the “experts” on terrorism and defense issues 
who appeared on the “McNeil-Lehrer News Hour” in the course of a 
year in the mid-1980s. We can see that, excluding journalists* a majority 
of the participants (54 percent) were present or former government 
officials* and that the next highest category (15.7 percent) was drawn 
from conservative think tanks* The largest number of appearances in 
the latter category was supplied by the Georgetown Center for Strate¬ 
gic and International Studies (CSIS)* an organization funded by con¬ 
servative foundations and corporations* and providing a revolving door 
between the State Department and CIA and a nominally private organi¬ 
zation* 93 On such issues as terrorism and the Bulgarian Connection* the 
CSIS has occupied space in the media that otherwise might have been 
filled by independent voices. 94 

The mass media themselves also provide “experts” who regularly 
echo the official view* John Barron and Claire Sterling are household 
names as authorities on the KGB and terrorism because the Reader’s 
Digest has funded* published* and publicized their work; the Soviet 
defector Arkady Shevchenko became an expert on Soviet arms and 
intelligence because Time> ABC-TV* and the New York Times chose to 
feature him (despite his badly tarnished credentials). 95 By giving these 
purveyors of the preferred view a great deal of exposure* the media 
confer status and make them the obvious candidates for opinion and 
analysis. 

Another class of experts whose prominence is largely a function of 
serviceability to power is former radicals who have come to “see the 
light.” The motives that cause these individuals to switch gods* from 
Stalin (or Mao) to Reagan and free enterprise, is varied, but for the 
establishment media the reason for the change is simply that the ex- 

