those mobilized to fight the U.S, war and who were “let down"; 80 the vast 



introduction XXXV 


numbers killed or damaged by the U.S. assault have been treated as 
“unworthy victims ” The overwhelming preoccupation of officials* jour¬ 
nalists* pundits* and intellectuals with media outreach has been on U.S. 
victims and the effects of the war on this country. Robert McNamara's 
widely publicized book* supposedly a mea culpa and moral tract* is no¬ 
table for the fact that his notion of the war's “high costs*” and the error 
and guilt he feels* extend only to US- lives and the effects of the war on 
“the political unity of our society.”® 1 He offers neither regrets* moral 
reflections, nor apologies for his country having invaded* mercilessly 
bombed* ravaged the land* and killed and wounded millions of innocent 
people in a small distant peasant society in pursuit of its own political 
ends. 

In a remarkable cultural process* also* the victims have been turned 
into the villains. As we describe in chapter 5* in an attempt to prolong the 
war President Richard Nixon seized on the question of the adequacy of 
Vietnamese accounting for our military personnel who were captured 
(POWs) and those missing in action (MIAs). He succeeded in keeping 
the war going* and some 16*000 more U.S. soldiers and untold numbers 
of Vietnamese died in the further fighting in the purported interest of 
missing POWs. But although there has never been any credible evidence 
that a single POW was hidden by the North Vietnamese* this claim be¬ 
came an article of faith and cult that dominated U.S. policy toward Viet¬ 
nam for many years. 82 

The myth also became the basis of popular culture accounts in movies 
such as The Deer Hunter , Uncommon Valor * DO. W: The Escape * and 
Missing in Action * in which Rambo-like heroes slaughter evil Vietnamese 
as they save our betrayed and tormented POWs. These movies turned 
history on its head. As Vietnam war historian H. Bruce Franklin points 
out* “America's vision of the war was being transformed. The actual 
photographs and TV footage of massacred villagers* napalmed children* 
Vietnamese prisoners being tortured and murdered* wounded GFs 
screaming in agony* and body bags being loaded by the dozen for ship¬ 
ment back home were being replaced by simulated images of American 
POWs in the savage hands of Asian communists ” 83 The powerful cul¬ 
tural myth of abused POWs as the central feature of the Vietnam war not 
only allowed the war to be extended; it helped justify the U.S. failure to 
aid its victim in accord with end-of-war promises and it provided the 
basis for an eighteen-year economic war against the victim country. It 
also functioned as a potent agent of militarization and force weakening 
the “Vietnam syndrome ” 

In his recent book Vietnam and Other American Fantasies * H. Bruce 
Franklin* who had previously exposed the fallacies and cult qualities of 



XXXVI INTRODUCTION 


the POW-MIA myth, addressed this issue once again, as well as other 
fantasies (such as the claim that the antiwar activists often spit at return¬ 
ing veterans). 84 Franklin’s book was reviewed in the Los Angeles Times 
but was otherwise only twice mentioned in passing in the U.S, main¬ 
stream press. On the other hand, a book by Michael Lind, Vietnam; The 
Necessary War * 5 which explains that the war was justifiable because com¬ 
munism was on the march, US. “credibility” was at stake, and the Viet¬ 
namese communists were cruel and ruthless—demonstrated in part by 
their refusal to surrender and consequent responsibility for those killed 
by U.S. bombs!—was treated differently. It received forty-four reviews 
and was mentioned twenty-seven other times in the mainstream media* 
and Lind was given Op-Ed space in both the New York Times and the 
Washington Post , among other opportunities. 

In his review of Lind’s book, Vietnam War historian Lloyd Gardner 
noted that any U.S. “credibility” problem that arose in connection with 
the Vietnam war was a creation of the war managers themselves and 
flowed from their own decisions; and Gardner also comments, after ana¬ 
lyzing a series of lind arguments in defense of the war* that “the evidence 
simply washes away his positions like a sand castle on the beach ” 86 But 
Lind was saying what the elite wants said, and Franklin was not, so that 
mainstream media treatment followed accordingly. 


Laos 

Laos’s Plain of Jars was subjected to some of the heaviest bombings of 
civilian targets in history, especially after 1968* when Washington was 
compelled under domestic pressure to enter negotiations with North 
Vietnam and had to terminate its bombing there. It turned to Laos, 
although that small peasant country was a marginal factor in the wars; 
but Nixon and Kissinger could hardly leave U.S. bombers inactive. Over¬ 
all, some 2 million tons of bombs were dropped on Laos. These raids 
wiped out 353 villages and killed thousands of civilians, and they con¬ 
tinue to kill now, as the Plain was saturated with hundreds of millions 
of “bombies”—tiny antipersonnel weapons specifically designed to kill 
and maim. With their 20-to-30 percent failure-to-explode rate, they re¬ 
mained as potential killers, and their casualty rate is still high, estimates 
running from hundreds to 20*000 or more per year, half of them deaths 
and half of the victims children, 87 

There have been efforts to deal with this humanitarian catastrophe. 
