had no intention of running* and (2) that he had no mass base and would 
have been badly beaten. 

In retrospect* Kinzer concedes the fact* although with the customary 
propaganda twist. He writes that “Ortega’s landslide victory was never 
in doubt,” because “the opposition was splintered” (and* as he fails to 
observe* had no popular base* in contrast to the well-organized San- 
dinista party), and “because the Sandinistas controlled the electoral 
machinery,” Neither he nor anyone else has offered a particle of evi¬ 
dence that Sandinista control over the electoral machinery made the 
elections a sham* or to contest the conclusion of the LASA delegation 
that “the FSLN did little more to take advantage of its incumbency 
than incumbent parties everywhere (including the United States) rou¬ 
tinely do*” A few days earlier* Kinzer had quoted Arturo Cruz as 
observing that the Sandinistas deserve credit for having overthrown 
Somoza and “having broken barriers in Nicaragua that had to be bro¬ 
ken* and that is irreversible*” because “the Sandinistas were working 
in the catacombs while we in the traditional opposition were out of 
touch with the rising expectations of the masses*” As Kinzer knows, but 
will not write* the same was true at the time of the 1984 elections* which 
is why the Sandinista victory was never in doubt* This deceitful dismis¬ 
sal of the 1984 elections is one of Kinzer’s many contributions to the 
media campaign to contrast the “elected presidents” of the four Central 
American “democracies” with the Sandinista dictator Ortega, not an 
elected president by U*S. government imprimatur* The specific context 
was the massive media campaign to attribute the failures of the 
Guatemala City peace agreement of August 1987 to the Sandinistas, in 
accordance with Reagan administration priorities, on the eve of the 
crucial congressional vote on renewed contra aid* 105 

LASA also stresses the fact that Cruz—effectively representing the 
contras, a segment of the local business community, and the United 
States—could have run in the Nicaraguan election, with excellent 
funding, ample media access* and without fear of being murdered. Even 
without Cruz the contras had an electoral voice* LASA notes that 

We know of no election in Latin America (or elsewhere) in which 
groups advocating the violent overthrow of an incumbent govern¬ 
ment have themselves been incorporated into the electoral pro¬ 
cess* particularly when these groups have been openly supported 
by a foreign power* The contras nevertheless had a voice in the 
1984 election campaign* Two of the Coordinadora-affiliated par- 



LEGITIMIZING VERSUS MEANINGLESS THIRD WORLD ELECTIONS 129 


ties, the PSD and the PLC, supported their inclusion in the elec¬ 
tions. And while denying that they represented the contras, Arturo 
Cruz and the Coordinadora seemed to endorse and promote their 
cause, both within Nicaragua and abroad (p. 18). 


LASA also discusses in some detail the U.S. intervention in the elec¬ 
tion, noting the terrorizing overflights by U.S. planes during the elec¬ 
tion campaign, and considering at some length the U-S. efforts to 
induce the withdrawal of candidates. LASA reported the claims by both 
Liberal and Conservative party figures that the United States offered 
specific and large sums of money to get candidates to withdraw from 
the election. 


3.6*6. The concern over freedom of 
the press and assembly 

Not only the rights of any and all candidates to run for public office, 
but other basic conditions that had been off the agenda in El Salvador 
and Guatemala were of deep concern to the U.S. government and mass 
media in reference to Nicaragua. The New York Times, Time, Newsweek, 
and CBS News all put great stress on the trials and tribulations of La 
Prensa , 106 although during the Salvadoran election none of them had 
even mentioned the destruction by physical violence and murder of La 
Cronica and El Independienze, or the toll of murdered journalists. Mob 
violence allegedly organized by the government, and the threat of the 
neighborhood defense committees, were featured by Time in Nicara¬ 
gua, whereas ORDEN and the death squads in El Salvador and 
Guatemala it had never mentioned as pertinent to election quality, 
Basic conditions of a free election were not only back on the media 
agenda, but there were strong suggestions that Nicaragua was failing 
to meet these conditions . These suggestions were based almost entirely 
on quotes from U.S. officials and Cruz and his allies in Nicaragua. The 
media never gave evidence of having actually looked into these matters 
for themselves or tapped independent sources of evidence. 

Richard Wagner, on CBS News (Nov. 3, 1984), citing as usual Ar¬ 
turo Cruz as the “strongest opposition, 54 also mobilizes a single Nica¬ 
raguan citizen (no doubt selected at random) who says: “How can this 
be free elections [ric] when we don't have freedom of speech, free¬ 
dom of the press?” Wagner says that “In addition to censorship” 
there were food shortages, a deteriorated transportation system, an 



130 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


unpopular draft, and church opposition, so that “it becomes apparent 
why a free and open election is not in the cards.” The cynicism in 
failing to raise the question of why there are food shortages and a 
