
3.5* “FIRST STEP: GUATEMALA 
OPTS FOR MODERATION” 73 

The U,S, government was less deeply involved in the Guatemalan 
elections of 1984 and 1985 than it was in those held in El Salvador, but, 
as we saw in chapter 2, the Reagan administration went to great pains 
to put a favorable gloss on the murderous regimes of Lucas Garcia, Rios 
Montt, and Mejia Victores, and to attempt to reintegrate them fully into 
the free-world alliance* 74 It encouraged the 1984-85 elections, provided 
advisory and financial support for election management, and gave pub¬ 
lic-relations assistance and sent official observers to help put the elec¬ 
tion in a favorable light* There was little effort made to disguise the fact 
that the purpose of the election, from the standpoint of the Reagan 
administration and the ruling army, was to alter the international 
“image” of Guatemala in order to facilitate aid and loans* 

With the administration supporting the new look, but without the 
intensity of commitment and propaganda backup brought to bear in El 
Salvador, and given the steady stream of reports of ongoing mass 
murder in Guatemala, a propaganda model would anticipate a media 
response that put the Guatemalan elections in a favorable light, but 
with qualifications* There was, in fact, far less coverage than of the 
Salvadoran election; what there was had a little more “balance,” but the 
apologetic framework was still overwhelmingly dominant* 

A telling manifestation of bias was the media’s ready acceptance of 
the Guatemalan elections as meaningful, even though they were admit¬ 
tedly for image-making, in a context of long-standing army rule and 
massacre, and despite new institutional arrangements in the country¬ 
side—the massive relocations of the population, the “model villages,” 
and the civil-defense patrols—that were, on their face, incompatible 
with a free election* In an enemy state where an election was held under 
comparable conditions, it would be designated a meaningless public- 
relations exercise* 75 In the case of Guatemala, however, the civil patrols 
and ongoing massacres were rarely mentioned, sources that addressed 
these matters were ignored, and the overall tone of the news was 
cautiously hopeful and optimistic* It was the consensus that the 1984 







LEGITIMIZING VERSUS MEANINGLESS THIRD WORLD ELECTIONS III 


election for a constituent assembly was “encouraging” and an impor¬ 
tant first step, and that the 1985 presidential election “ended [emphasis 
added] more than 30 years of military domination” ( Newsweek, Jan. 17, 
1986}. Dan Rather, on CBS News, reported that Cerezo became 
GuatemaJa’s “first civilian leader after thirty years of almost uninter¬ 
rupted military rule” (Dec. 9,1985), This is ambiguous, but the implica¬ 
tion, directly asserted by Newsweek, is that Cerezo, not the army, rules . 
Julio Mendez Montenegro was a civilian president from 1966 to 1970, 
but he did not rule, and he was eventually discredited by the fact that 
he presided over a huge escalation of army violence. Given the earlier 
experience, the fact that the generals had made it clear that the civilian 
government was “a project” of the military, 76 and Cerezo’s own ex¬ 
pressed reservations about his power, objective news reporting would 
have been careful about an alleged ending of military rule. 

As in the case of El Salvador, the murderous rule of the Guatemalan 
generals did not delegitimize them for the U.S. mass media nor suggest 
any possible justice to the rebel cause. Time noted (Feb. 27,1984) that 
a leftist insurgency “poses a permanent challenge to the regime,” but 
it did not inquire into the roots of this insurgency or suggest that its 
leaders constituted a “main opposition” whose ability to run would be 
an “acid test” of election integrity (as they pronounced in Nicaragua). 
Time also did not observe that the regime poses a permanent challenge 
to the survival of its population. The mass murders of the Guatemalan 
state were even semi-justified by the unquestioned need to quell insur¬ 
gents—“Much of the killing,” says Time, “is linked to Mejia’s success 
against the insurgents.” The phrase “linked to” is an apologetic euphe¬ 
mism to obscure the fact that Mejia’s “success” was based on the mass 
murder of men, women, and children in literally hundreds of destroyed 
villages. 77 Mejia has a “mixed record,” with the mass murder offset by 
“improvements in some important areas” (the State Department, 
quoted by Time). Mejia, says Time, “won support because he has kept 
the promises he made after seizing power.” Time never explains how 
it determined that Mejia “won support,” or from whom, other than the 
U.S. State Department. Was the press then free to speak out? Did a 
system of justice come into being? 

In chapter 2 we summarized Americas Watch’s demonstration that 
the Reagan administration made serial adjustments in its apologetics for 
each successive Guatemalan terrorist general, with a lagged, tacit ac¬ 
knowledgment that it had previously been lying . This has no influence 
whatsoever on Time's treatment of State Department pronouncements 
as authentic truth—the standard from which other claims may be eval¬ 
uated. Thus Time says that “Americas Warch, a controversial group 



112 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


that is often accused of being too sympathetic to the left, called 
Guatemala 'a nation of prisoners/ ” Time doesn’t independently evalu¬ 
