Commission issued a statement in Mexico saying that the election’s 
meaning should be viewed in the context of three important facts: 
namely, that the requirements for a meaningful election stipulated by 
the United Nations in a March 14 statement had not been met; that the 
left had been excluded from participation in the election; and that 115 
persons had been murdered or disappeared in the thirty days prior to 
the election of July 1. This statement, and the facts cited by the commis¬ 
sion, were ignored in the U.S. press. 

Consider also the following facts: On May 3, General Oscar Mejia 
Victores removed Ricardo Sagastume Vidaure from his position as 
president of the judiciary and the supreme court. On April 11, the 
judiciary had issued writs of habeas corpus on behalf of 157 kidnapped 
individuals, and Sagastume had protested to Mejia Victores over the 
difficulty in proceeding against military abuses. On May 4, Acisco 
Valladares Molina, head of the Populist party, noted that Sagastume 
had been “fired like a simple subordinate.” On May 8, a communique 
from the Guatemalan bar association stated that in Guatemala there is 
no rule of law, as demonstrated by the constant violation of human 
rights and uncontrolled exercise of arbitrary power. By May 8, at least 
sixteen judicary officials, including supreme court and court of appeals 
magistrates, had resigned in protest at Sagustume’s removal. 

Stephen Kinzer never discussed any of these events, or their mean¬ 
ing, in the TimeSy nor did any of his colleagues elsewhere in the mass 
media. This is in accord with our hypothesis that in elections held in 
client states, fundamental electoral conditions, such as the presence or 
absence of the rule of law, are off the agenda. The point applies to other 
relevant structural conditions. Thus, while Kinzer occasionally men¬ 
tioned the civil-defense patrols, he never described them and their 
operations in any detail or tied them in with other institutional struc¬ 
tures of control, and he failed to relate them in a systematic way to army 
power. The numerous reports on these coercive institutions and their 
terrorist role by Amnesty International, Americas Watch, and the Brit¬ 
ish Parliamentary Human Rights Group were almost never cited by 
Kinzer in providing facts relevant to the Guatemalan elections. Al¬ 
though the constituent assembly elected in 1984 produced a new consti¬ 
tution, Kinzer never once discussed the nature of this instrument, 
which validated the special army role and structural constraints on 
freedom of the press. 



LEGITIMIZING VERSUS MEANINGLESS THIRD WORLD ELECTIONS 


Kinzer was reporting news in a way that fit the Times 's editorial 
position and the U.S. government agenda. The Times editorial frame 
was that “The military, in power for most of 31 years, has honored its 
promise to permit the free election of a civilian president.” 82 Kinzeris 
