Once again* the U*S* escalation of the war against Cambodia in 1969 



272 manufacturing consent 


coincided with similar efforts in Laos and Vietnam. The general reac¬ 
tion was similar throughout, and remains so- The post-Tet accelerated 
pacification campaign, which thoroughly demolished the civilian base 
of the NLF, was regarded as so uninteresting that it is passed over in 
virtual silence in the popular retrospectives- As for the wars in Laos and 
Cambodia, Elterntan comments, after reviewing the major media cover¬ 
age, that apart from the “alternative press,* 5 they were virtually “invisi¬ 
ble” in the press in 1969 when they were expanding to new heights as 
the U-S, Air Force was shifted from North Vietnam to Laos and Cam¬ 
bodia after the “bombing halt/* 50 

In March 1970, Cambodia was drawn irrevocably into the carnage 
sweeping Indochina. On March 18, Sihanouk was overthrown in “an 
upper-class coup, not a revolution,” carried out for “interests of domes¬ 
tic and political expedience,” and with at least “indirect U.S. support,” 
if not more, 51 Two days later, ARVN ground and air operations began 
in Svay Rieng Province, at the Vietnamese border, continuing through 
April and leading to the U.S.-ARVN invasion on April 29, conducted 
with an extreme brutality sometimes vividly depicted in the media, 
which were particularly appalled by the behavior of the ARVN forces. 
Much of the enormous civilian toll, however, resulted from air power, 
including U.S. bombing strikes that leveled or severely damaged towns 
and villages. 52 One effect of the invasion was to drive the Vietnamese 
forces away from the border and deeper into Cambodia, where they 
began to support the growing peasant resistance against the coup lead¬ 
ers. A second effect, as described by U.S. correspondent Richard Dud- 
man, who witnessed these events at first hand after his capture by the 
Cambodian resistance, was that “the bombing and shooting was radi¬ 
calizing the people of rural Cambodia and was turning the countryside 
into a massive, dedicated, and effective revolutionary base.” 53 Cam¬ 
bodia was now plunged into civil war, with increasing savagery on both 
sides. 

U.S. bombing continued at a high level after the withdrawal of U.S. 
forces from Cambodia, By late 1971, an investigating team of the Gen¬ 
eral Accounting Office concluded that U.S. and Saigon army bombing 
is “a very significant cause of refugees and civilian casualties,” estimat¬ 
ing that almost a third of the seven-million population may be refugees. 
U.S. intelligence reported that “what the villagers feared most was the 
possibility of indiscriminate artillery and air strikes,” and refugee re¬ 
ports and other sources confirm that these were the major cause of 
civilian casualties and the flight of refugees. 54 

Information about what was happening in the peasant society of 
Cambodia in the early 1970s was limited but not unavailable. There 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (ll): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 2?3 


were* first of all, many refugees with stories to tell, although the media 
were not interested* There was also an eyewitness account by French 
Southeast Asia specialist Serge Thion, who spent two weeks in regions 
controlled by the Cambodian guerrillas* His reports were offered to the 
Washington Post, but rejected* 55 They were of no more interest than the 
reports of life under the bombing in Laos, or similar questions regard¬ 
ing Vietnam throughout the war and in the retrospectives* 

As in Laos, the escalating war remained largely “invisible” in the 
media* Surveying a five-month period in early 1972 in the national 
press, Elterman found that “In terms of war casualties, the focus in 
The New York Times and Time was on military-related deaths and 
almost always only those that occurred in Vietnam, ignoring also the 
civilian deaths and refugees in that country too. . . . During the winter 
and spring of 1972, the war in Cambodia and Laos was ignored more 
than usually with most of the Indo-China news coverage given to the 
North Vietnamese offensive into South Vietnam and the United States 
bombing of Hanoi and Haiphong.. * * Time, in fact, had more coverage 
on civilian casualties in Northern Ireland during the first half of 1972 
than it did on the Indo-China War_” 56 

Meanwhile, Cambodia was being systematically demolished, and the 
Khmer Rouge, hitherto a marginal element, were becoming a significant 
force with substantial peasant support in inner Cambodia, increasingly 
victimized by U.S. terror* As for the U.S.-backed Lon Nol regime, 
Michael Vickery points out that their “client mentality” and subse¬ 
quent “dependency led them to acquiesce in, or even encourage, the 
devastation of their own country by one of the worst aggressive on¬ 
slaughts in modern warfare, and therefore to appear as traitors to a 
victorious peasant army which had broken with old patron-client rela¬ 
tionships and had been self-consciously organized and indoctrinated 
for individual, group, and national self-reliance*” 57 

In early 1973, U.S* bombing increased to a scale that might truly 
merit the term “genocidal” used by the Finnish Inquiry Commission* 
In the five-month period after the signing of the Paris peace accords, 
the bombing matched the level of the preceding three years, 58 and it was 
to continue at that level until Congress forced a halt in August— 
although bombing and shelling of the countryside by armies of the 
U.S.-backed regime were to continue on a substantial scale, with U.S. 
guidance and supply, until the waris end. Over a million refugees fled 
to Phnom Penh, which became a horror chamber while the countryside 
