Guatemala in every non-Orwellian sense of the word; 7 that its govern¬ 
ment does not murder ordinary citizens on a routine basis, as the 
governments of El Salvador and Guatemala do; 8 that it has carried out 
socioeconomic reforms important to the majority that the other two 
governments somehow cannot attempt; 9 that Nicaragua poses no mili¬ 
tary threat to its neighbors but has, in fact, been subjected to continu¬ 
ous attacks by the United States and its clients and surrogates; and that 
the U.S. fear of Nicaragua is based more on its virtues than on its 
alleged defects, 10 The mass media also steer clear of discussing the 
background and results of the closely analogous attempt of the United 
States to bring “democracy” to Guatemala in 1954 by means of a 
CIA-sponsored invasion, which terminated Guatemalan democracy for 
an indefinite period. Although the United States supported elite rule 
and helped to organize state terror in Guatemala (among many other 
countries) for decades, actually subverted or approved the subversion 
of democracy in Brazil, Chile, and the Philippines (again, among oth¬ 
ers), is “constructively engaged” with terror regimes on a global basis, 
and had no concern about democracy in Nicaragua as long as the brutal 
Somoza regime was firmly in power, nevertheless the media take gov¬ 
ernment claims of a concern for “democracy” in Nicaragua at face 
value. 11 

Elite disagreement over tactics in dealing with Nicaragua is reflected 
in public debate, but the mass media, in conformity with elite priorities, 
have coalesced in processing news in a way that fails to place U.S. 
policy into meaningful context, systematically suppresses evidence of 
U.S, violence and aggression, and puts the Sandinistas in an extremely 
bad light. 13 In contrast, El Salvador and Guatemala, with far worse 
records, are presented as struggling toward democracy under “moder¬ 
ate” leaders, thus meriting sympathetic approval. These practices have 
not only distorted public perceptions of Central American realities, 
they have also seriously misrepresented U.S. policy objectives, an es¬ 
sential feature of propaganda, as Jacques Ellul stresses: 

The propagandist naturally cannot reveal the true intentions of 
the principal for whom he acts. . . . That would be to submit the 
projects to public discussion, to the scrutiny of public opinion, and 
thus to prevent their success. . . . Propaganda must serve instead 
as a veil for such projects, masking true intention. 13 



Ixii PREFACE 


The power of the government to fix frames of reference and agendas, 
and to exclude inconvenient facts from public inspection, is also im¬ 
pressively displayed in the coverage of elections in Genual America, 
discussed in chapter 3, and throughout the analysis of particular cases 
in the chapters that follow* 
