Cong”), along with some NVA elements. The effects are succinctly 
summarized by Wallace Thies in his scholarly study of the U.S. strategy 
of “coercing Hanoi”: 

• *. although U.S. military commanders would later claim that the 
offensive had been anticipated and that the heavy casualties suf¬ 
fered by the attackers had resulted in a great victory for the Allies, 
the offensive was in fact a military setback for the American side. 
To meet the threat in the northern provinces and forestall a Dien 
Bien Phu-type defeat at Khe Sanh, half of all U.S. maneuver 
battalions in South Vietnam were deployed in I Corps [in the 
north]; the rest, along with the bulk of the combat-ready ARVN 
[GVN, Government of (South) Vietnam] units, were tied down 
defending the cities against the possibility of a second wave of 
attacks. As a result, the countryside went by default to the NLF, 
the pacification program was left in a shambles, and whatever 
losses the DRV / VC [North Vietnamese / Viet Cong] forces did 
suffer in the initial assaults were largely offset by the unimpeded 
recruiting that they conducted in the rural areas in the weeks that 
followed. 110 

International Voluntary Services (IVS), which had a close familiarity 
with the situation in rural areas, withdrew most of its field workers in 
early 1968 because of “security conditions.” A volunteer reported in 
February: “The number of locations at which we can safely place a 
volunteer have significantly decreased in recent months”; another 
added that “we all knew that security in the countryside was getting 
worse and worse,” contrary to the optimistic evaluations of the U.S. 
high command and Washington, which were relayed with little skepti¬ 
cism by the media in the pre-Tet period. A South Vietnamese senator 
estimated that after Tet, the government controlled “only one third of 
the country,” the remaining two-thirds being in the hands of the NLF, 
an estimate consistent with U.S, intelligence reports. 111 

The Tet offensive left Washington in a state of “troubled confusion 
and uncertainty,” Undersecretary of the Air Force Townsend Hoopes 
observed, and “performed the curious service of fully revealing the 
doubters and dissenters to each other, in a lightning flash,” within the 
Pentagon. While General Westmoreland persisted with the optimistic 
assessments that had been undermined by this dramatic demonstration 
that the NLF remained firmly rooted in the South despite the devastat¬ 
ing American attack on the rural society, the reaction in official Wash- 



216 manufacturing consent 


ington circles was quite different. Summarizing the impact in Washing¬ 
ton, George Herring observes that in private, 
