One week 
later, on March 26, the Cambodian government publicly condemned 
the bombing and strafing of “the Cambodian population living in the 
border regions ... almost daily by U.S. aircraft,” with increasing killing 
and destruction, alleging that these attacks were directed against 
“peaceful Cambodian farmers” and demanding that “these criminal 
attacks must immediately and definitively stop....” Prince Sihanouk 
called a press conference on March 28 in which he emphatically denied 
reports circulating in the United States that he “would not oppose U.S. 
bombings of communist targets within my frontiers.” “Unarmed and 
innocent people have been victims of U.S. bombs,” including “the 
latest bombing, the victims of which were Khmer peasants, women and 
children in particular.” He then issued an appeal to the international 
press: “I appeal to you to publicize abroad this very clear stand of 
Cambodia—that is, I will in any case oppose all bombings on Cambo¬ 
dian territory under whatever pretext.” 45 

It will come as no surprise that his appeal went unanswered.Further¬ 
more, this material has been suppressed up to the present time, apart 
from the dissident literature.46 The standard position within the main- 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (II): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 2 JI 


stream* adopted by defenders of the bombing and critics as well* is that 
“Sihanouk did not protest” (William Shawcross), When the “secret 
bombings” became public knowledge in 1973* it was claimed that Siha¬ 
nouk had privately authorized bombing of Vietnamese bases near the 
border areas* True or false* that is irrelevant to the suppression of 
Sihanouk’s impassioned appeals* which referred to the bombing of 
Khmer peasants.Furthermore* as we observed in earlier discussion* 
st while commentators and media analysts may draw whatever conclu¬ 
sions they please from the conflicting evidence available, this does not 
entitle them to suppress what is* by any standards, crucial evidence* in 
this case* Sihanouk’s attempt to arouse international protest over the 
U*S* bombing of the civilian society.” 47 

Reviewing this period in his Cambodia Year Zero, Francois Pon- 
chaud remarks that Sihanouk called the U*S. bombings of “Vietcong 
bases” a “scandal and a crime over Radio Phnom Penh, but nobody was 
deceived*” Ponchaud and his readers* however* are deceived: Sihanouk 
publicly denounced the bombing and other attacks on Khmer peasants, 
and not only over Radio Phnom Penh but in quite public documents 
and appeals to the international press , In his Sideshow, Shawcross says 
only that Cambodia “continued to denounce” American air and artil¬ 
lery attacks through 1969, but “made no public protest that specifically 
mentioned B-52 attacks” (p* 94)—true* but irrelevant for the reasons 
repeated in the last paragraph.