reference to “straw man journalism/* “CBS exclusives” and the like* 
referring to alleged misdeeds of the media, is misplaced; case by case, 
we find, instead, “Freedom House exclusives.’* 

Before proceeding to details, we should take careful note of the 
background assumptions that guide this inquiry. As we noted, for Bra- 
estrup and Freedom House, the “allies” are the United States, the 
South Vietnamese client government, and the various South Korean, 
Thai, Australian, Chinese Nationalist, and other forces (largely merce¬ 
nary) mobilized by the United States* The “South Vietnamese 51 include 
our client government and the armed forces organized, supplied, 
trained, and directed by the United States, but exclude the indigenous 
NLF and its supporters, although the U,S. government never had the 
slightest doubt, and its specialists do not hesitate to concede, that the 
client regime had little support while its opponents in South Vietnam 
constituted so powerful a political force that any peaceful settlement 
was unthinkable. That the United States has a right to conduct military 
operations in South Vietnam to uproot the NLF and destroy the peas¬ 
ant society in which it was based, that its goals are democracy and 
self-determination, and that its forces “protect” and “bring security” 
to South Vietnamese peasants are principles taken for granted in the 
Braestrup-Freedom House version, where no patriotic assumption or 
cliche is ever challenged—or even noticed, so deeply rooted are these 
doctrines. Correspondingly, the fact that the media coverage surveyed 
is framed entirely within these patriotic premises passes unnoticed. The 
Freedom House inquiry cannot perceive fundamental bias favorable to 
the state because all of the premises of state doctrine are taken as given. 
There is “mindlessness” here, as Braestrup observes, although it is not 
quite what he perceives; rather, we find that Braestrup “mindlessly” 
adopts what we referred to in chapter 3 as a patriotic agenda, even more 
so than the media he condemns* And as we described in chapter 1, the 
function of such “flak machines” as Freedom House is to ensure that 
the press stays within the bounds of this patriotic agenda. 

The Tet offensive of January 1968 began on January 21 with a siege 
by North Vietnamese (NVA) regulars of a U.S, military base at Khe 
Sanh, near the 17th parallel* It was soon apparent that the purpose was 
to draw U.S. forces away from populated centers, and the siege suc¬ 
ceeded in this aim, as General Westmoreland rushed combat forces to 
the northern areas. On January 31, all major cities and thirty-six of 
forty-four provincial capitals, along with numerous other towns, came 





THE INDOCHINA WARS (i): VIETNAM 215 


under simultaneous attack by southern NLF resistance forces (“Viet 
Cong”), along with some NVA elements. The effects are succinctly 
summarized by Wallace Thies in his scholarly study of the U.S. strategy 
of “coercing Hanoi”: 

• *. although U.S. military commanders would later claim that the 
offensive had been anticipated and that the heavy casualties suf¬ 
fered by the attackers had resulted in a great victory for the Allies, 
the offensive was in fact a military setback for the American side. 
To meet the threat in the northern provinces and forestall a Dien 
Bien Phu-type defeat at Khe Sanh, half of all U.S. maneuver 
battalions in South Vietnam were deployed in I Corps [in the 
north]; the rest, along with the bulk of the combat-ready ARVN 
[GVN, Government of (South) Vietnam] units, were tied down 
defending the cities against the possibility of a second wave of 
attacks. As a result, the countryside went by default to the NLF, 
the pacification program was left in a shambles, and whatever 
losses the DRV / VC [North Vietnamese / Viet Cong] forces did 
suffer in the initial assaults were largely offset by the unimpeded 
recruiting that they conducted in the rural areas in the weeks that 
followed. 110 

International Voluntary Services (IVS), which had a close familiarity 
with the situation in rural areas, withdrew most of its field workers in 
early 1968 because of “security conditions.” A volunteer reported in 
February: “The number of locations at which we can safely place a 
volunteer have significantly decreased in recent months”; another 
added that “we all knew that security in the countryside was getting 
worse and worse,” contrary to the optimistic evaluations of the U.S. 
high command and Washington, which were relayed with little skepti¬ 
cism by the media in the pre-Tet period. A South Vietnamese senator 
estimated that after Tet, the government controlled “only one third of 
the country,” the remaining two-thirds being in the hands of the NLF, 
an estimate consistent with U.S, intelligence reports. 111 

The Tet offensive left Washington in a state of “troubled confusion 
and uncertainty,” Undersecretary of the Air Force Townsend Hoopes 
observed, and “performed the curious service of fully revealing the 
doubters and dissenters to each other, in a lightning flash,” within the 
Pentagon. While General Westmoreland persisted with the optimistic 
assessments that had been undermined by this dramatic demonstration 
that the NLF remained firmly rooted in the South despite the devastat¬ 
ing American attack on the rural society, the reaction in official Wash- 



216 manufacturing consent 


ington circles was quite different. Summarizing the impact in Washing¬ 
ton, George Herring observes that in private, 
