

Perkins commented: “There was no discriminating one house from 
another. There couldn’t be, and there did not need to be. The whole 
village had turned on the Americans, so the whole village was being 
destroyed/’ as is only right and just. In a follow-up on the Cam Ne 
incident, Dan Rather offers a comment that Hallin cites as an example 
of “a muckraking tone,” the harshest he presents: the marines are 
holding Cam Ne 

by force, not through the pacification program . . . [which] hasn’t 
taken hold in Cam Ne. And until it does take hold here and a lot 
of other places in South Vietnam, nobody can feel very good about 
this dirty little war. 

In short, as long as there is still resistance to American violence, we 
cannot feel good about proceeding with our necessary chores^ such 
comments as these presumably account for Rather’s reputation among 
the “doves” as a courageous opponent of the war, and among the 
“hawks” as a dangerous leftist. Walter Cronkite reported “an urgent 
plea from the Vietcong for medical and surgical supplies” to the Inter¬ 
national Red Cross, “an indication that our bombing raids and infantry 
sweeps are taking a heavy toll of all kinds of Red equipment, ” S9 
Reporting of civilian casualties rose from 1966 to a peak in early 1968, 
then declined sharply as the United States turned to the murderous 
accelerated pacification campaign, which Hallin does not discuss, pre¬ 
sumably because it was largely ignored by television, which had shifted 
attention to the negotiating tables in Paris in accordance with Washing¬ 
ton priorities. The coverage rose again in 1972, when casualties could 
be attributed to a North Vietnamese offensive and the U.S. “response.” 
In a 1971 CBS documentary entitled “The Changing War in Indo¬ 
china,” Charles Coliingwood reported the progress of the pacification 
campaign in Kien Hoa Province in the Mekong Delta—“once an NLF 
stronghold,” Hallin observes. This province had been the target of 
Operation Speedy Express in early 1969, one of the most brutal Ameri¬ 
can operations of the war in an area that had been organized under 
NLF control with no known North Vietnamese presence, conquered 
through the “awesome firepower” of the Ninth Division. This included 
air strikes using napalm, high explosives, and anti-personnel bombs, 
B-52 bombing, and artillery shelling “around the clock” at a level that 
“it is impossible to reckon,” with armed helicopters “scouring the 
landscape from the air night and day” and accounting for “many and 
perhaps most of the enemy kills”—about 11,000 according to the U.S. 
command, with 748 weapons captured, a fair indication of who was 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (i): VIETNAM 205 


killed. 90 Coiiingwocd was pleased to observe progress in pacification* 
although there was still “Indian country” beyond. “This is almost like 
St. Louis on the move into the frontier*” his companion* a U.S. govern¬ 
ment adviser replied* in a reference that is more accurate than he 
probably knew. 91 

In contrast to the heroic and humane image of the American soldiers 
defending democracy* the NLF and North Vietnamese were portrayed 
in “an almost perfectly one-dimensional image ... as cruel, ruthless and 
fanatical.” Of twelve positive comments by journalists that he found 
throughout the war* Hallin remarks* “10 concerned the effectiveness of 
enemy forces: this was the only element of television's image of the 
enemy that changed substantially” in the course of the post-Tet shift* 
mirroring establishment qualms about the prospects for the success of 
American arms. “What did not change was the dark picture of evil.” 
When U.S. forces burned villages* this was a necessity because they 
provided cover and support for the Viet Cong. The results of B-52 
saturation bombing were a “tragedy of war.” But when a North Viet¬ 
namese artillery shell hit an orphanage in An Hoa in October 1970, 
ABCs George Watson commented with horror: “No one was prepared 
for the massacre* the irrational murder that the North Vietnamese 
inflicted on An Hoa.” Although civilian casualties were overwhelmingly 
the result of U.S. firepower, attribution of responsibility by television 
was weighted by a 10 to 7 ratio to the account of the enemy; its 
“calculated policy of terror” contrasted with the unfortunate but legiti¬ 
mate side-effects of U.S. operations. Even military operations of the 
enemy were “terrorism.” Reporting on a Viet Cong ambush of an 
American patrol* ABCs Peter Jennings recounted “another of those 
small but [and here he paused a moment for dramatic effect] harrowing 
VC butcheries” (October* 1965). The North Vietnamese and Viet Cong 
were portrayed as “savage*” “brutal,” “murderous*” “fanatical*” “sui¬ 
cidal,” “halfcrazed,” mere vermin in areas that were “Communist in¬ 
fested” or “Vietcong infested,” and thus had to be cleansed by the 
American liberators. 92 

The style and technique are familiar in state propaganda of all 
varieties. 

Overall, Hallin concludes from his survey* television never veered 
from the official interpretation of the war as “a struggle to defend 
democracy against aggression/' In the early years, it was taken for 
granted that 

we would surely win, not only because we were more powerful but 

because the right was clearly on our side. Television held this view 



206 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 
