

killing a matter of course, and few institutional restraints on terror. The 
peasantry of inner Cambodia, largely unknown to Western scholarship 
or to the urban population* appear to have lived under conditions of 
extreme violence and hatred for the oppressors from outside the village. 

During the French war of reconquest in the late 1940s, up to “per* 
haps one million rural inhabitants . ., were forcibly 'regrouped. 5 55 The 
huge flow of refugees to Phnom Penh during phase l of the "decade 
of the genocide” was not the first massive dislocation in recent history, 
Vickery continues, adding that it is, furthermore, "a strange kind of 
history 55 that regards the displacement of people fleeing from U.S. 
bombs and savage fighting “as somehow less abhorrent or more 'nor¬ 
mal 5 than the reverse movement of 1975,” the forcible evacuation when 
the peasant army of the Khmer Rouge conquered the city. Leaders of 
the anti-French resistance after World War II describe horrifying 
atrocities conducted with obvious pleasure as a “normal 55 part of 
“Khmer mores, 55 In the same years, government forces led by Lon Nol, 
who was to head the U.S.-backed client government in the early 1970s, 
carried out wholesale massacres in villages as the French withdrew, 
including such “individual tests of strength 55 as “grasping infants by the 
legs and pulling them apart,” actions that “had probably not been 
forgotten by the men of that area who survived to become the Khmer 
Rouge troops 55 whose later atrocities in this “gentle land 55 aroused such 
outrage in the West, “Thus for the rural 80-90 percent of the Cambo¬ 
dian people, 55 Vickery concludes, “arbitrary justice, sudden violent 
death, political oppression, exploitative use of religion and anti-reli¬ 
gious reaction, both violent and quiescent, were common facts of life 
long before the war and revolution of the 1970s, 55 These conditions 
elicited no interest in the West. “The creations of Pol Pot-ism were all 
there in embryo, 55 Vickery continues, to be “directed first of all at the 
urban population 55 after a war which was in large measure “a war 
between town and countryside in which the town's battle was increas¬ 
ingly for the sole purpose of preserving its privileges while the rural 
areas suffered.” 40 

It is superfluous to observe that the United States deployed its ample 
means of violence in defense of urban privilege. But, in fact, these tasks 
were only of secondary importance. For the United States, the destruc¬ 
tion of rural Cambodia was ancillary to the goal of maintaining in power 
the client regime in South Vietnam. 

Contrary to the arrangements in Laos and Vietnam, the Geneva 
Accords afforded no recognition to the anti-French resistance in Cam¬ 
bodia, a source of much bitterness. The country was ruled by Prince 
Sihanouk until March 1970, when he was overthrown in a coup sup- 



