that the New York Times is describing are Vietnamese carrying out 
aggression against Americans in Vietnam, so no such scruples are in 
order, and none were expressed. 

Similarly, there was little reaction when B-52 raids in “the populous 
[Mekong] delta” were reported in 1965, with unknown numbers of 
civilian casualties and hordes of refugees fleeing to government-con¬ 
trolled areas “because they could no longer bear the continuous bomb¬ 
ings.” 72 The victims fell under the category of “the unfortunate 
accidental loss of life incurred by the efforts of American military forces 
to help the South Vietnamese repel the incursion of North Vietnam and 
its partisans,” as explained by Sidney Hook while condemning Bertrand 
Russell because he “plays up” these meritorious actions “as deliberate 
American atrocities,” 73 No doubt one can find similar remarks today in 
Pravda in commentary on Afghanistan by other commissars who are 
much admired as leading humanitarians because they courageously 
condemn the crimes of the United States and its allies in Soviet 
journals. 

Not only was there no reaction to these and subsequent atrocities, 
but there was also no attempt to place them in the context of what had 
immediately preceded—that is, to make them intelligible. Indeed, there 
was little awareness of the background, because the media were so 
closely wedded to U.S, government goals and perceptions that they 
never sought to learn the facts. As the war progressed, ample evidence 
became available from U.S. government sources to explain why the 
United States had been forced to resort to violence in “the populous 
delta,” as elsewhere, as we described in the preceding section. But such 
materials, inconsistent with the preferred image of the United States 
defending South Vietnam from Communist terror and aggression, had 
little impact on news reporting or commentary, except for occasional 
illustration of the difficulties faced by the United States in pursuing its 
noble cause. 

The reason for the U.S. resort to violence was overwhelmingly clear 
by the time of the outright U.S. invasion in 1965, and would have been 
no less clear before had any serious effort been made to determine the 
facts. As noted above, the United States was compelled by the political 
and social successes of the southern Viet Minh (NLF, “Viet Cong”) to 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (l)l VIETNAM 195 


shift the struggle away from the political arena* where it was weak* to 
the arena of violence, where it was strong, a typical response to a classic 
dilemma. 

It is in this context that we can understand the resort to B-52 raids 
in “the populous delta” and elsewhere to destroy the civilian base of 
the indigenous enemy, expanding the failed efforts of the strategic- 
hamlet program and earlier terror. The U.S. media continued to report 
the subsequent atrocities, but from the standpoint of the aggressors. 
One had to turn to the foreign press to find reports from zones held by 
the South Vietnamese enemy—for example, those of the pro-Western 
correspondent Katsuichi Honda, who reported in the Japanese press in 
the fall of 1967 from the Mekong Delta, describing attacks against 
undefended villages by gunboats in the Mekong River and helicopter 
gunships “firing away at random at farmhouses,” “using the farmers for 
targets as if in a hunting mood”: “They are hunting Asians. . . . This 
whimsical firing would explain the reason why the surgical wards in 
every hospital in the towns of the Mekong delta were full of wounded.” 
His reports were available only to readers of antiwar literature, not the 
“objective” media, which had no interest in how the war might appear 
from the standpoint of the Vietnamese victims of the attack by the 
United States and the local forces it established. 74 

The media continued to observe and discuss atrocities blandly, not 
considering them as controversial or as raising any moral issue—in fact, 
not regarding them as atrocities at all, although we detect no such 
reserve with regard to the violence of official enemies. The respected 
columnist Joseph Harsch describes the frustrations of an American 
pilot dropping bombs “into a leafy jungle” with “no visible result” and 
without “the satisfaction of knowing what he achieved”: 

A hit on a big hydroelectric dam is another matter. There is a huge 
explosion visible from anywhere above. The dam can be seen to 
fall* The water can be seen to pour through the breach and drown 
out huge areas of farm land, and villages, in its path. The pilot who 
takes out a hydroelectric dam gets back home with a feeling of 
accomplishment. Novels are written and films are made of such 
exploits. . , , The bombing which takes out the dam will flood 
villages, drown people, destroy crops, and knock out some electric 
power. . . * Bombing the dam would hurt people. 75 

Nevertheless, it is better to bomb trucks, he concludes, although there 
would plainly be no moral barrier to the much more satisfying alterna¬ 
tive rejected on tactical grounds. 



1 96 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


In the South* bombing of dikes and virtually limitless destruction 
was an uncontroversial tactic, as in the Batangan Peninsula, where 
12,000 peasants (including, it appears, the remnants of the My Lai 
massacre) were forced from their homes in an American ground sweep 
in January 1969 and shipped off to a waterless camp near Quang Ngai 
