Guatemala Bishops 5 Conference issued pastoral statements that sug¬ 
gested in no uncertain terms and with detailed arguments that condi¬ 
tions in the country were incompatible with a free election. Its pastoral 
letter of June 8,1984, focused on the civil-defense patrols as “suscepti¬ 
ble to manipulation, 15 and it discussed the disappearances, “insatiable 
corruption, 51 and the fact that sociopolitical structures are “not capable 
of promoting the welfare of the whole society,* 579 Stephen Kinzer men¬ 
tioned this report in a Times news article of July 22, 1984, but his 
reference is made after the election of July 1, and Kinzer did not use 
it to frame the discussion of electoral conditions and to arrive at an 
assessment of the quality of the election. Furthermore, his summary of 
the twenty-seven-page report, that it “denounced torture, electoral 
fraud, concentration of wealth and ‘massacres of entire families, 5 J * 
ignores the quite specific critique of the conditions bearing on an elec¬ 
tion, Time mentioned this pastoral letter briefly; Newsweek and CBS 
News never mentioned it. 

In connection with the 1985 election, the bishops put forth another 
powerful statement, once again questioning whether an election can be 
meaningful in “a situation close to slavery and desperation, 5580 They 
point out that the civil-defense patrols, the “ideology of national secu¬ 
rity,* 5 and hunger and impoverishment are not conducive to serious 
elections: 

In order that the longed-for results be obtained, there must be not 
only the freedom at the moment of casting one 5 s vote, but also a 
whole series of particular social, political and economic conditions 
which are, unfortunately, not happening in Guatemala. In effect 
there still persist in Guatemala harsh violence, lack of respect for 
human rights and the breaking of basic laws. It is a fact that any 
citizen pressured, terrorized or threatened is not fully able to 
exercise his/her right to vote or to be elected conscientiously. 

This letter was not mentioned in the major media or anywhere else, to 
our knowledge, although the bishops are conservative, credible, and 
one of the few organized bodies in Guatemala not crushed by state 
terror. 

There were other dissenting voices in Guatemala—politicians of the 
lesser parties, union officials, human-rights groups, lawyers, and ju¬ 
rists—who spoke out occasionally on the limits to free electoral condi- 



114 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


tions in Guatemala. And there were events of note that threw a power¬ 
ful light on the subject. Most of these were blacked out in the ILS, mass 
media. For example/ 1 on July 4,1984* the Guatemalan Human, Rights 
