during phase II; the latter, our friends whom we cheerfully supplied 
and supported as they conducted comparable massacres in Timor at the 
same rime. This apparent inconsistency , which briefly troubled even the 
editors of the Wall Street Journal in the early 1980s, 39 is now happily 
resolved: we support both the Khmer Rouge and the Indonesian 
generals. 



2$6 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


The current U.S. support for the Khmer Rouge merits little atten¬ 
tion in the media* just as little notice is given to the Vietnamese posi¬ 
tion: a political settlement among Cambodians excluding Khmer Rouge 
leaders Pol Pot and his close associate leng Sary. 90 As noted earlier* 
U.S. aid to the Khmer Rouge is reported by congressional sources to 
be extensive. Furthermore* the Reagan administration* following “Chi¬ 
nese rather than Southeast Asian inclinations*” has refused to back the 
efforts of its Southeast Asian allies “to dilute the strength of China’s 
ally, the deposed Pol Pot regime* by giving greater weight to non- 
Communist guerrillas and political groupings/ 191 Nayan Chanda re¬ 
ported in 1984 that the United States had “more than doubled its 
financial assistance to the resistance forces,” mainly through funds 
earmarked for humanitarian assistance that permit U.S. allies to divert 
funds to arms purchases* a familiar ploy 92 While it is claimed that the 
funds are limited to the (generally ineffectual) non-Communist resist¬ 
ance, this is a shallow pretense. “Both Sihanouk’s army and Son Sann’s 
KPNLF,” the two components of the non-Communist resistance* “are 
completely discounted in Phnom Penh*” James Pringle reports from 
Phnom Penh in the Far Eastern Economic Review. “ ‘All they do is stt 
drinking coca-cola on the border/ said one well-informed Soviet bloc 
diplomat.” From the Thai border areas, Barbara Crossette reports that 
“Trucks loaded with men and boys* 150 or 200 at a time, pull away from 
settlements controlled by Pol Pot’s Khmer Rouge and rumble into 
Cambodia,” where the supplies are carried “into the Cambodian inte¬ 
rior to stockpile supplies for the Khmer Rouge*” in the expectation that 
they will be able to prevail by military force and terror once the Viet¬ 
namese withdraw as demanded by the United States. A spokesman for 
the Sihanoukist National Army in Bangkok comments that “The main 
problem we now have is how to get the Vietnamese to pull out without 
bringing back the Khmer Rouge*” the probable consequence of U.S. 
policy. Former Assistant Secretary of State Richard Holbrooke com¬ 
ments that the U.S. aid “will end up going to Pol Pot and his people*” 
a fact noted also by several journalists. Sydney Schanberg’s Cambodian 
associate Dith Fran, whose story of suffering under DK terror was the 
basis for the widely publicized film The Killing Fields and much media 
commentary* found somewhat greater difficulty in reaching the public 
with his view that “Giving U.S. weapons [to the Khmer resistance] is 
like putting gasoline on a fire*” and is the last thing Cambodia needs. 
David Hawk alleges that “it is common knowledge that Reagan- 
administration political officers and defence attaches from the US Em¬ 
bassy in Bangkok have visited Khmer Rouge enclaves.” 93 

The reasons for supporting the Thai-based DK coalition go beyond 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (ll): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 287 


their “continuity” with the Khmer Rouge regime, A more fundamental 
reason was outlined by our ally Deng Xiaoping in 1979: “It is wise to 
force the Vietnamese to stay in Kampuchea because that way they will 
suffer more and more and will not be able to extend their hand to 
Thailand, Malaysia, and Singapore.” 94 This motive of “bleeding Viet¬ 
nam” to ensure that it does not recover from its victimization at the 
hands of the West has additional advantages. By acting in such a way 
as to enhance suffering and repression in Indochina, we demonstrate 
retrospectively the “benevolence” of our “noble crusade” of earlier 
years. 

As we discussed earlier, the Cambodians were “worthy victims” 
when they were being terrorized by the Khmer Rouge under phase II 
of the genocide, and they achieved this status once again after the 
Vietnamese invasion brought phase II of the genocide to an end, al¬ 
though with a change in the cast of characters, as the United States 
joined China in support of the Khmer Rouge. After early efforts to 
charge the Vietnamese with “genocide,” the condemnation of the offi¬ 
cial enemy shifted to the terrible acts of “the Prussians of Asia,” who 
have “subjugated and impoverished” Cambodia since overthrowing Pol 
Pot, according to the editors of the New York Times. Recall that of ail 
the horrors of the past years, including the atrocities of phase I, “what 
cannot be sponged away” are “the Khmer Rouge's butcheries”—evi¬ 
dently of lesser moment in Washington now that the Pol Pot forces 
qualify as resistance forces under the Reagan doctrine. 

One would be hard put to find any serious observers of the current 
Cambodian scene who believe that the Vietnamese have reduced Cam¬ 
bodia to a level below that of the DK period, as these comments imply. 
Rather, among people who are concerned about the people of Cam¬ 
bodia for themselves and not merely because of their value for propa¬ 
ganda exercises, few would question that “it is clear that life for the 
people is far better now than under Democratic Kampuchea,” 95 and 
some Cambodia specialists have suggested that the current regime com¬ 
pares favorably with any of its predecessors- Consistent opponents of 
aggression would have a moral basis for condemning the Vietnamese 
invasion, despite the rapidly escalating atrocities of 1977-78 and the 
murderous raids against Vietnam by Cambodian forces under Pol Pot's 
rule. 96 It is a little difficult to take this argument seriously, however, 
