election 

In the propaganda format, a great deal of attention is paid to the 
mechanical properties of elections in client states, but not in states 
whose elections are being denigrated. This was true in the cases under 
discussion. Time (Apr* 9,1984) described in detail the elaborate elec¬ 
toral preparations in El Salvador* the “tamper-proof* procedures, the 
use of transparent Lucite ballot boxes* and the indelible-ink marking 
and stamping of ID cards* It turned out* however, that the high-tech, 
computerized voting procedures weren't understood by the population, 
more than half of whom were illiterate. At no point did Time, or its 
media colleagues, raise any question about the importance of improving 
literacy as a necessary prelude to an election; nor did they suggest that 
the Lucite boxes might compromise the secrecy of the vote* or that the 
stamped ID card might be a coercive instrument helping to explain 
turnout, 

Nicaragua went to great pains to provide for election secrecy* and 
for an easy and intelligible system of voting. For one thing, they had 
a massive literacy campaign before the election, making electoral 
printed matter generally accessible* Both the Irish and LASA delega¬ 
tions mention this as an electoral plus* Nicaragua also put a high 
priority on getting a complete registration list and getting the voters 
registered* The Irish delegation noted that “Recent elections in other 
Central American countries such as El Salvador and Guatemala did not 
introduce such measures, and there was considerable debate concern¬ 
ing the validity of their registers* which were based on out-of-date 
census figures* incomplete official registers of population changes, and 
other sources” (p* 5). Nicaragua also deliberately avoided transparent 
ballot boxes* ID stamping, and any other mechanism that would allow 
the authorities to identify whether or how somebody had voted* LASA 
points out that * 






LEGITIMIZING VERSUS MEANINGLESS THIRD WORLD ELECTIONS 121 


The ballots were also printed on heavy opaque white paper* The 
contrast with Somoza-era elections is striking* The Somozas used 
translucent ballots, so virtually everyone assumed that their ballot 
was not secret* The same problem occurred in the 1984 elections 
in El Salvador, where thin-paper ballots were deposited in trans¬ 
parent ballot boxes. The vote in Nicaragua in 1984 was truly a 
secret ballot (p, 14)4 

In Nicaragua, also, there was proportional voting, which made it possi¬ 
ble for the smaller parties to obtain legislative representation. Parties 
could also qualify quite easily to participate in the election* In 
Guatemala, 4,000 signatures were needed to qualify in 1984, a large 
number and not easy for dissident parties to collect in a society with 
daily political murders* 

Stephen Kinzer and his associates never mentioned these differ¬ 
ences. More generally, the substantial merits of the Nicaraguan elec¬ 
tions were never contrasted with the procedures in the U*S. client 
states, a comparison that would have been most revealing and that 
would have thoroughly undermined the Reagan agenda to which the 
media were committed in their reporting of the election. Time 3 as noted, 
mentions the compromised Salvadoran procedures as if they were meri¬ 
torious* The Times mentioned the transparent voting boxes in El Salva¬ 
dor only once (Richard Meislin, on March 25,1984), repeating without 
question the official line that the purpose of the translucent boxes was 
to prevent fraud. Any other possibility is unmentioned. Newsweek and 
CBS News ignored these matters. 


3,6.3* Rebel disruption into the 
black hole; turnout no longer an 
index of triumph of democracy 

In the Salvadoran election, rebel disruption was a central feature of the 
government's propaganda frame* Because the rebels opposed the elec¬ 
tion, voting by the people proved their rejection of the rebels and 
approval of the army. Turnout was the index of democratic triumph 
and rebel defeat. As we saw, the mass media followed this frame with¬ 
out question. In the case of Nicaragua, the propaganda format was 
reversed—the rebels were the good guys, and the election held by 
the bad guys was condemned in advance. Rebel opposition to the 
election—and efforts at disruption—did not make voting and a large 






122 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


turnout a repudiation of the rebels and approval of the Sandinistas* 

The U.S. mass media once again followed the government agenda* 
even though it meant an exact reversal of the standards they had applied 
in the Salvadoran election * The contras and their supporters urged the 
public not to vote* and interfered with the election process with at least 
as much vigor as (and with more killings than) the rebels in El Salvador* 
Furthermore* voting was more assuredly secret and the citizens were 
