
tioning the report’s admission of the limits of its information. No refer¬ 
ence is made to Santivanez or the Dinges report: Newsweek sticks to an 
official source, and misreads it. 


2,5, TWENTY-THREE RELIGIOUS 
VICTIMS IN GUATEMALA, 
1980-85 

The modem history of Guatemala was decisively shaped by the U.S.- 
organized invasion and overthrow of the democratically elected regime 
of Jacobo Arbenz in June 1954. Since that time, while Guatemala has 
remained securely within the U.S, sphere of influence, badly needed 
economic and social reforms were put off the agenda indefinitely, politi¬ 
cal democracy was stifled, and state terror was institutionalized and 
reached catastrophic levels in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Given the 
client status of Guatemala and the fact that the antidemocratic counter¬ 
revolution served important elite interests, a propaganda model sug¬ 
gests that its victims will be “unworthy,” which should be reflected in 
both the quantity and quality of media attention. Furthermore, whereas 
victimization in Soviet client states like Poland and Czechoslovakia is 
regularly traced back to the Soviet occupations, a propaganda model 
would predict that the U.S. media will not explain the contemporary 
Guatemalan environment of state terror as a natural product of the U.S. 
intervention in 1954 (and thereafter). On the contrary, we would expect 
the United States to be portrayed as a benevolent and concerned by¬ 
stander, trying its very best to curb abuses of right and left extremists. 

Before looking at the media’s handling of Guatemala, however, let 
us step back for a brief review of the crucial period 1945-54 arK * * ts 
sequel to set the stage for an examination of the media’s role in the 
r9§os. Arbenz and his predecessor, Juan Arevalo, led the first demo¬ 
cratic system in Guatemalan history. During the decade of their rule, 
newspapers, social groups, unions, peasants, and political parties could 
organize without fear of repression or murder. 72 But this fragile democ¬ 
racy rested on a base of concentrated land ownership and foreign 
control of land and strategic facilities that was a constant threat to its 
independence and political freedom, as well as a human disaster. The 
struggle for unionization and land reform during the democratic decade 
was motivated in part by a desire to build a mass constituency that 
would provide an institutional base for democracy. 73 Each progressive 


72 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


move by both Arevalo and Arbenz was greeted with fierce hostility by 
the local oligarchy, the multinational corporate community, and the 
U*S. government, 74 “Communism” was found to be in control, or a 
