cited in the previous footnote. 

5. Tying the assassination attempt to the Soviet Union and KGB was espe¬ 
cially helpful in discrediting the Soviet leadership in 1982 and early 1983, as 
Yuri Andropov, who had just succeeded Brezhnev as head of state, was at one 
time head of the KGB. The Bulgarian, Sergei Antonov, was arrested in Italy 
within three weeks of Andropov’s assuming power. 

6. See Herman and Brodhead, Bulgarian Connection pp. 102-3, 206-7. 

7. For an analysis of these NBC-TV programs, see Edward S. Herman and 
Frank Brodhead, “The KGB Plot to Assassinate the Pope: A Case Study in 
Free World Disinformation,” Covert Action Information Bulletin 19 (Spring- 
Summer 1983), pp. 13-24. 

8. Both Sterling and Henze asserted this many times, without providing any 
evidence and without attempting to explain how destabilization would serve 
Soviet interests, given the likelihood—eventually realized, in fact—that insta¬ 
bility and internal disorder in Turkey would bring into power a military regime 
even more closely aligned with the United States. Sterling and Henze were 
fortunate that they were never called upon to explain these things to Western 
audiences. 

9. Marvin Kalb expounded this precise sequence, without the benefit of a 
single piece of evidence beyond the fact that Agca had had a brief stay in 
Bulgaria—among twelve countries—asserting that “it seems safe to conclude 
that he had been drawn into the clandestine network of the Bulgarian secret 
police and, by extension, the KGB—perhaps without his even being aware of 
their possible plans for him” (transcript of the Sept. 21,1982, show, pp. 44-45). 

10. See how Sterling handles the problem of Agca’s gun, in the text below. 


11. SHK regularly assume that the Soviet leadership is wild, and regularly 
engages in “Dr. No”-type plots, and the mass media do not challenge this 
image. On the conservative reality, see George Kennan, The Nuclear Delusion: 
Soviet-American Relations in the Nuclear Age (New York: Pantheon, 1982); 
John Lowenhardt, Decision-Making in Soviet Politics (New York: St. Martin’s, 
1981); and Jerry Hough and Merle Fainsod, How the Soviet Union Is Governed 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1979). 

12. NBC-TV stressed an alleged note sent by the pope to Brezhnev threatening 
that in case of a Soviet invasion, the pope would give up his papal crown and 
return to Poland to lead the Polish resistance. Thus the assassination attempt 
was to get the pope out of the way to clear the ground for a prospective 
invasion. This note has never been produced, and the Vatican has denied its 
authenticity. See page 162. For a further discussion of these issues, see Herman 
and Brodhead, Bulgarian Connection , pp. 14-15, 200. 

13. Papa y Mafya y Agca (Istanbul: Tekin Yayinevi, 1984), pp. 213-20. Mumcu 
also wrote a substantial volume on Agca and his record, Agca Dosyasi (Ankara: 
Tekin Yayinevi, 1984). 

14. After Agca decided to “confess,” he explained to the Italian magistrates 
that he was a killer for hire by anyone who wanted a reliable “international 
terrorist.” He sounded just as Claire Sterling said he ought to sound. This was 
taken quite seriously by the Italian judiciary and Western press. See Herman 
and Brodhead, Bulgarian Connection , pp. 113-14. 

15. For a full analysis of this theory, see Herman and Brodhead, Bulgarian 
Connection , pp. 138-40. 

16. Michael Dobbs, “Child of Turkish Slums ...,” Washington Post y October 
14,1984. Agca’s shooting of the pope may have been motivated in part by his 
quest for notoriety. 

17. For a full account of this strategy and the other matters dealt with in this 
paragraph, see Herman and Brodhead, Bulgarian Connection pp. 71-98. 

18. Criminal Court of Rome, Judgment in the Matter of Francesco Pazienza y et 
al. y July 29, 1985, signed by Francesco Amato, president of the court. 

19. Diana Johnstone, “Latest Scandal Leads to Reagan Administration,” In 
These Times y December 5-11, 1984. 

20. Tana de Zulueta and Peter Godwin, “Face to Face with the Colonel 
Accused of Plotting to Kill the Pope,” Sunday Times y May 26, 1983, p. 50. 

21. “Behind the Scenes of the ‘Agca Investigation,’ ” Milliye^ November 1984. 
This excellent two-part series by Milliyet' s correspondent in West Germany 
describes the Italian investigation then in process as an extremely biased and 
incompetently managed exercise. Its many inconvenient but highly relevant 
facts may also have contributed to it being entirely ignored in the Western 
press. 

22. For a discussion of the various suspicious aspects of this photo identifica¬ 
tion, see Herman and Brodhead, Bulgarian Connection , pp. 110-11. 

23. De Zulueta and Godwin, “Face to Face with the Colonel...,” p. 50. Even 
during the investigative phase of the case, it was disclosed that Agca’s sensa¬ 
tional knowledge of the telephone numbers of the Bulgarian embassy in Rome 
was slightly compromised by the disclosure that he had “inadvertently” been 
left alone with a copy of the Rome phone directory. For other illustrations, 
see Herman and Brodhead, Bulgarian Connection , pp. 112, 118-19. 


1 



