Luoog—in error—killing many government soldiers and their families. 
This is the sole example of American bombing that was shown in the 
film The Killing Fields^ the only depiction there of phase I of the 
genocide, a memory that is acceptable since it was plainly an error. 

We located eighteen additional reports datelined Cambodia, from 




278 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


March 25 through August i8. 6S One quotes a villager who says “The 
bombers may kill some Communists but they kill everyone else, too” 
(Browne, April 11), but we found no other examples of reactions by the 
victims, although there is a picture of a Cambodian soldier weeping for 
his wife and ten children killed in the bombing of Neak Luong by error 
(Aug. 10). 

In forty-five columns, then, there are three in which victims of U.S. 
bombing are granted a few phrases to describe what is happening in 
Cambodia, Not a single column seeks to explore the reactions of the 
refugees not far from the Hotel Le Phnom, or in Battambang, or in the 
far more miserable refugee camps in the countryside nearby; or to 
attempt to develop some sense of what must have been happening 
under the frenzied bombing of these months* Recall that in Phnom 
Penh alone there were almost 1*5 million refugees who had fled from 
the countryside, some, surely, who must have had some information to 
relate about phase I of the genocide at its peak. The reader could no 
doubt ascertain that terrible things were happening in the Cambodian 
countryside, but what they were remains obscure, and the Americans 
are explicitly exonerated, apart from the error of bombing the wrong 
village* 

The story remained much the same as phase I of the genocide 
continued. The horrors in Phnom Penh itself were sometimes vividly 
described, primarily abroad, 69 but there was little effort to determine 
what was happening in the areas held by the enemy of the U*S. govern¬ 
ment—hence the enemy of the U,S, press; virtually the entire country 
as “the Cambodians” were confined to urban centers swelled by a huge 
flood of refugees who remain as hidden from view as those in the 
teeming slums of Saigon or the camps around Vientiane. 

Western correspondents evacuated from Phnom Penh after the 
Khmer Rouge victory were able to obtain a fleeting picture of what had 
taken place in the countiyside, British correspondent Jon Swain sum¬ 
marizes his impressions as follows: 

The United States has much to answer for here, not only in terms 
of human lives and massive material destruction; the rigidity and 
nastiness of the un-Cambodian like fellows in black who run this 
country now, or what is left of it, are as much a product of this 
wholesale American bombing which has hardened and honed their 
minds as they are a product of Marx and Mao* * . * [The mass 
evacuation of the cities] does not constitute a deliberate campaign 
of terror, rather it points to poor organisation, lack of vision and 
the brutalisation of a people by a long and savage war. . . * The 



THE INDOCHINA WARS ( 11 ); LAOS AND CAMBODIA 279 


war damage here [in the countryside], as everywhere else we saw, 
is total. Not a bridge is standing, hardly a house. I am told most 
villagers have spent the war years living semipermanently under¬ 
ground in earth bunkers to escape the bombing. . . . The entire 
countryside has been churned up by American B-52 bomb craters, 
whole towns and villages razed. So far I have not seen one intact 
pagoda. 70 

The conditions are much like those reported in 1970 by refugees from 
the Plain of Jars, in Laos; in both cases, these accounts were almost 
entirely excluded from the mainstream media. 

So ended phase I of the genocide. In later years, those who had 
transmitted narrowly selected fragments of this tale of horror expressed 
their bitterness that Cambodia had been “forgotten,” On the tenth 
anniversary of the Khmer Rouge takeover, Sydney Schanberg wrote 
two columns in the New York Times entitled “Cambodia Forgotten.” 
The first highlights the phrase: “Superpowers care as little today about 
Cambodians as in 1970,” the second dismisses Richard Nixon 5 s 1985 
claim that there was no “indiscriminate terror bombing” but only 
“highly accurate 5 * strikes “against enemy military targets. 55 Schanberg 
comments that “Anyone who visited the refugee camps in Cambodia 
and talked to the civilian survivors of the bombing learned quickly 
about the substantial casualties. 51 He recalls that “the Khmer Rouge 
were a meaningless force when the war was brought to Cambodia in 
1970. ... In order to flourish and grow, they needed a war to feed on. 
And the superpowers—including this country, with the Nixon incur¬ 
sion of 1970 and the massive bombing that followed—provided that war 
and that nurturing material. 55 He does not, however, inform us about 
which superpower, apart from “this country, 55 invaded Cambodia and 
subjected it to massive bombing. With comparable even-handedness we 
might deplore the contribution of the superpowers, including the 
USSR, to the destruction of Afghanistan, or the attitude of the great 
powers, including Nazi Germany, toward the victims of the death 
camps, whom Schanberg brings up in a later column the same month 
entitled “Memory is the Answer.” He also does not comment on what 
