The British-based Mines Advisory Group (MAG) has been trying to 
remove the lethal objects* but the British press reports that the United 




introduction XXXV11 


States is “conspicuously missing from the handful of western organiza¬ 
tions that have followed MAG,” though it has finally agreed to train some 
Laotian civilians. 88 The British press also reports, with some annoyance, 
that the United States has refused to provide MAG specialists with “ren¬ 
der harmless procedures/' still treated as a state secret for weapons three 
decades old. 89 The US. mainstream media have treated in very low key 
the continuing human toll suffered in Laos and have maintained almost 
complete silence concerning the U,S. non-cooperativeness in attempts to 
alleviate a crisis dating back to the “secret war” against Laos, which again 
was “secret” only by tacit propaganda service of the mainstream media 
(see chapter 6). 


Cambodia 

Important changes have occurred in Cambodia since 1988, including 
Vietnam's withdrawal from that country, elections held under UN aus¬ 
pices, and the death of Pol Pot, We noted in chapter 7 that, after the Viet¬ 
namese had ousred Pol Pot in December 1978, although the United 
States and its allies had denounced Pol Pot as “another Hitler” commit¬ 
ting “genocide,” they quickly became his supporter, allowing him to re¬ 
tain Cambodia's UN. seat and otherwise aiding and protecting him in 
his Thailand refuge, Viemam was severely punished—by harsh sanctions 
and by U,S. support for a Chinese invasion to teach Viemam a lesson— 
for having terminated Pol Pot's atrocities! President Carter's National 
Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski stated in 1979 that “I encouraged 
the Chinese to support Pol Pot. I encouraged the Thai ro help D,K. 
[Democratic Kampuchea, Pol Pot's forces], Pol Pot was an abomination. 
We could never support him but China could ” 90 In the late 1980s and 
early 1990s, as the Vietnamese sought to end their isolation by exiting 
from Cambodia, but insisted as a condition for withdrawal that Pol Pot 
and his Khmer Rouge be excluded from returning to power, the United 
States objected, and insisted, with eventual success, that the Khmer 
Rouge be included as a contestant party in The post-occupation settle¬ 
ment. 91 

What dominated US, policy and led to its support of Pol Pot was the 
classic rule that the enemy of my enemy (Vietnam) is my friend, and per¬ 
haps also the new till toward China, also hostile toward Vietnam, The 
support of Pol Pot was awkward, given the prior denunciations of his 
policies, but the mainstream media handled it with aplomb, and the US, 
public was almost surely completely unaware that the United States had 
become his ally and supporter. (The explicit statement of support by 



XXXV111 INTRODUCTION 


Brzezinski quoted above was never mentioned in the New York Times , the 
Washington Post , or Newsweek; it was quoted once in both the Los Angeles 
Times and Time.) 

However, in the late 1990$, after Vietnam had left Cambodia and US. 
official anti-Vietnam passions had subsided, and Pol Pot was no longer 
a useful instrument of anti-Vietnam policy, US. officials and pundits 
rediscovered Pol Pot's and the Khmer Rouge’s villainy and candidacy for 
war crimes trials. The media handled the previous “tilt” toward Pol Pot 
mainly by evasions essentially blacking out the years 1979-95, 0r vaguely 
intimating that the U.S. had supported him for reasons of “realpolitik 
but avoiding both details on the nature and magnitude of support as well 
as any reflections on the morality of backing “another Hitler.” The New 
York Times' s summary of “Pol Pot's Rise and Fall” (April 17, 1998) lists 
for “1979-1990: Pol Pot and Khmer Rouge are given refuge at Thai bor¬ 
der where they fight back against the Vietnamese ” “Given refuge” is mis¬ 
leading: they were given economic and military aid and political support 
by the United States and its allies. The Times's main reporter on Cambo¬ 
dia in early 1998, Seth Mydans, repeatedly blacked out mention of U.S. 
support^ referring to “the decade-long civil war that followed” Pol Pot's 
ouster (April 13); and a nineteen-year “guerilla insurgency in the jungles 
of western and northern Cambodia” (April 17). 

The Boston Globe y New York Times , Washington Pasty and Los Angeles 
Timesy editorializing on the death of Pol Pot on April 17* 1998, were uni¬ 
formly indignant over his crimes and regretful at his escape from justice* 
but all avoided mentioning the long US. support of the criminal—as well 
as the US. contribution to the first phase of a “Decade of Genocide 
The Washington Post blacked out the inconvenient fifteen-year period of 
support of Pol Pot with this summary: “After the nightmare of Khmer 
Rouge rule and genocide, the United States and its allies pumped mil¬ 
lions of dollars into Cambodia to help rebuild and to hold elections 

It is enlightening to compare the media's treatment of Pol Pot and 
Indonesian leader Suharto, who was also in the news in 1998, as Indone¬ 
sia suffered a financial crisis that—along with popular resistance to the 
dictatorship—eventually led to his ouster. Pol Pot was described in the 
editorials and news columns of April 1998 as “crazed,” a “killer,” “war 
criminal,” “mass murderer,” “blood-soaked ” and as having engineered a 
“reign of terror” and “genocide ” But in 1998 and 1999, and in earlier 
years as well, while Suharto was occasionally referred to as a “dictator” 
and running an “authoritarian” regime, he was never a “killer” or “mass 
