A propaganda model has a certain initial plausibility on guided free- 
market assumptions that are not particularly controversial* In essence* 
the private media are major corporations selling a product (readers and 
audiences) ro other businesses (advertisers). The national media typi¬ 
cally target and serve elite opinion* groups that, on the one hand* 
provide an optimal “profile” for advertising purposes* and, on the 
other, play a role in decision-making in the private and public spheres* 
The national media would be failing to meet their elite audience’s needs 
if they did not present a tolerably realistic portrayal of the world. But 
their “societal purpose” also requires that the media’s interpretation of 
the world reflect the interests and concerns of the sellers, the buyers, 
and the governmental and private institutions dominated by these 
groups. 



304 manufacturing consent 


A propaganda model also helps us to understand how media person¬ 
nel adapt, and are adapted, to systemic demands. Given the imperatives 
of corporate organization and the workings of the various filters, con¬ 
formity to the needs and interests of privileged sectors is essential to 
success. In the media, as in other major institutions, those who do not 
display the requisite values and perspectives will be regarded as “irre¬ 
sponsible,“ideological,” or otherwise aberrant, and will tend to fall by 
the wayside- While there may be a small number of exceptions, the 
pattern is pervasive, and expected. Those who adapt, perhaps quite 
honestly, will then be free to express themselves with little managerial 
control, and they will be able to assert, accurately, that they perceive 
no pressures to conform. The media are indeed free—for those who 
adopt the principles required for their “societal purpose.” There may 
be some who are simply corrupt, and who serve as “errand boys” for 
state and other authority, but this is not the norm. 11 We know from 
personal experience that many journalists are quite aware of the way 
the system operates, and utilize the occasional openings it affords to 
provide information and analysis that departs in some measure from the 
elite consensus, carefully shaping it so as to accommodate to required 
norms in a general way. But this degree of insight is surely not common. 
Rather, the norm is a belief that freedom prevails, which is true for 
those who have internalized the required values and perspectives. 

These matters are of some importance. We can readily understand 
why Guatemalan reporters do not report the atrocities of the 1980s; 
some fifty corpses dramatically illustrate the costs of deviance from 
authority on the part of independent journalists. To explain why 
American reporters avoid such topics, and even go so far as to describe 
Guatemala as a model for Nicaragua (see p. 115), requires further 
explanation, and the same is true in innumerable other similar cases, 
some of which we have analyzed in detail, A propaganda model pro¬ 
