
The aftermath was predictable, predicted in the “alternative press,” 
and similar to earlier occasions when the same factors were operative. 
As after Geneva 1954, the Communists, who had won a political victory 





THE INDOCHINA WARS (l): VIETNAM 235 


(on paper)* attempted to pursue “political struggle,” while the United 
States and its GVN client at once turned to military force to overturn 
the terms of the Paris Agreements. These facts were reported by the 
more serious journalists on the scene in Vietnam, notably Daniel South¬ 
erland* who observed from his extensive investigations that “the Saigon 
government has been guilty in by far the greatest number of cases of 
launching offensive operations into territory held by the other side,” 
assuming “that it has the right, despite the cease-fire,” to take back 
territory which it lost in 1972,” and giving many examples, as did 
others. 149 The U.S. government informed Congress cheerily that “the 
GVN has fared well during the post-cease-fire maneuvering,” adding 
“770 hamlets to the list of those over which it has dominant control” 
after the agreements—and in violation of them, a fact that passed 
without notice. The GVN thus added one million people to the areas 
of its control, while expending sixteen times as much ammunition as 
the enemy and using the newly provided U.S, equipment, as intended, 
for massive military operations, including extensive bombardment of 
PRG areas to prevent refugees from returning to them as provided by 
the agreements. 150 The media either blamed the Communists, or some¬ 
times the GVN as well, but not the United States, which had an¬ 
nounced at once its intention to disrupt the agreements and now 
publicly expressed its pleasure in the military actions that successfully 
achieved this objective. 

When the North Vietnamese finally responded to U.S.-GVN vio¬ 
lence, the GVN quickly collapsed, leading to outrage in the U.S. 
government and media—which still persists—over this dramatic dem¬ 
onstration of Communist iniquity, which proves that their intentions all 
along were to destroy the free and independent government of South 
Vietnam and to reduce its people to Communist tyranny, thus further 
entrenching the principle that “Communists cannot be trusted.” 

This useful lesson, firmly established by media complicity in trans¬ 
parent government deceit, has, not surprisingly, been applied in subse¬ 
quent efforts by the U.S. government to gain its ends by violence. One 
dramatic example was featured in the media in August 1987, when the 
Central American presidents confounded Washington strategy by 
adopting a political settlement that undermined the familiar U.S. reli¬ 
