

312 APPENDIX I 


blank or spoiled. This would seem to compromise the notion that the 
Guatemalan people had gotten into long lines out of patriotic enthusiasm. 
Howard Penniman explained, however, that this was a result of illiteracy. 
Other possibilities are unmentioned. Why the illiteracy rates were so high 
thirty years after the United States saved Guatemala for freedom is also not 
discussed. 

8. The case for further aid. The observers showed their objectivity, and the 
labor representatives Kahn and Friedman demonstrated their commitment to 
liberal principles, by acknowledging that this election was only a “first step,” 
and that a full-fledged democracy such as that just established in El Salvador 
(Regula) was still to come. Some of the observers would sanction additional 
aid imm ediately, Mickey Edwards urging that the Guatemalan army would 
benefit from being “exposed to American values and to American training.” 4 
The others were more noncommittal, but agreed that the election was fair, 
meaningful, and deserving of U.S. recognition and support. 

In sum, this was a caricature of observation, but a fairly typical performance 
of U.S. “official observers.” The report of this group was cited by Stephen 
Kinzer in the New York Times and elsewhere in the U.S. press as a serious 
source of information on the Guatemalan election. The official report of the 
Latin American Studies Association on the Nicaraguan election, written by 
specialists in the region after an intensive eight-day investigation, Kinzer and 
his mass-media colleagues never mentioned. 


Appendix 2 


TAGLIABUE’S FINALE ON THE 
BULGARIAN CONNECTION: 

A Case Study in Bias 

To show in another way the propagandistic quality of the mass media’s cover¬ 
age of the Bulgarian Connection, we will examine in detail the article by John 
Tagliabue, “Verdict on Papal Plot, But No Answer,” published in the New 
York Times on March 31,1986. This piece, which provides a final wrap-up that 
enters “history” as the mature judgment of the veteran Times newsman as¬ 
signed to the Rome trial, is a model illustration of the systematic bias that we 
believe characterized mass-media reporting of the Bulgarian Connection, with 
only minor exceptions, A close examination shows how Tagliabue incorporates 
all of the elements of the Sterling-Henze-Kalb (SHK) model of the connec¬ 
tion, selects facts in accordance with the requirements of that model, and 
bypasses conflicting facts and interpretations. 1 


The Framing of the Issue: The Case 
Still “Unresolved” 

The court dismissal of the case against the Bulgarians in Rome confronted the 
Times with a problem of framing. The Times had presented the case as plausi¬ 
ble for years, and now had to confront the rejection of the case in a court 
decision. The solution was to latch on to the peculiar feature of the Italian 
judicial system whereby a party found not guilty can be declared positively 
innocent or not guilty for reason of lack of evidence. Thus, as the title of 
Tagliabue’s article suggests, there was a verdict, but “no answer,” and Taglia¬ 
bue’s first paragraph focuses on the “unresolved” nature of the case. It would 
have been possible to stress the fact that the Bulgarians were found not guilty 
for lack of evidence, and to emphasize that Western law requires positive proof 
of guilt. But the Times was not about to acknowledge defeat after five years 
of finding the Bulgarians guilty. 

Tagliabue also downplays the court decision by making it an unsurprising 
event. “Few people were surprised by the verdict,” states Tagliabue. But the 
failure to find the Bulgarians guilty should have been quite surprising, given 
the earlier assurances by Sterling and associates that the Bulgarians were 
clearly behind the plot, and that, as Paul Henze stated, the “evidence” has 
“steadily accumulated to the point where little real doubt is now possible.” 2 

An alternative frame would have been as follows: After a three-year investi¬ 
gation and lengthy trial, backed by the resources of the Italian state, and 
despite the powerful interests in Italy and the West with a stake in finding the 
Bulgarians guilty, the prosecution still failed to persuade an Italian jury of 
Bulgarian guilt. These vested interests and their propaganda vehicles were 
given a bone to chew on, however, in the form of a decision to dismiss the 
charge for “lack of evidence,” rather than complete exoneration. This then 
allowed the propaganda agencies to frame the case in the Tagliabue manner. 


Protection of the Italian Judicial 
Process 

Throughout the history of the case, the U.S. mass media blacked out evidence 
of the compromised quality of the Italian institutions involved in pursuing the 
connection. Investigating Judge Martella was always treated as a model of 
probity, and conflicting facts were ignored. 3 Operating in this tradition, Taglia¬ 
bue wastes space on a gratuitous and irrelevant accolade to Martella (which 
is also given a subheading for emphasis). His statement that “Few people stood 
up to assail the magistrate” is absurd, as the trial witnesses were asked to give 
concrete evidence on the facts of the case; they were not in a position to assail 
the pretrial investigating magistrate, and any such attempts would have been 
impermissible in the courtroom. Only the Bulgarian defense was well qualified 
and able to assail Martella, and they did so, in effective statements on March 
4-8, 1986, that were unreported in the Times and the rest of the mass media. 
