a neighboring “district*” suggesting* as Kiernan notes, that he feared 
punishment* but not that he had been “promoted” to “new authority.” 
Confronted with this evidence, Shawcross maintained his position 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (ll): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 295 


while retreating to the claim that some officials he met “seemed rather 
unpleasant,* 3 which suffices to prove the point, according to his logic, 115 
These examples are quite typical. 116 


6.2.9. Summary 

Summarizing, prior to “the decade of the genocide, 3 * media treatment 
of Cambodia was as predicted by the propaganda model, and the same 
is true, quite dramatically, during the two phases of this terrible period 
and since. During phase I, refugee testimony was considered uninter¬ 
esting, and little is known today apart from the fact that there was 
obviously vast slaughter and destruction; this phase does not enter the 
record as a “holocaust 3 * or exercise in “genocide,* 3 and the source is 
forgotten. During phase II, the myth of the “gentle land* 3 was extended 
through 1975, and the U.S. role and responsibility for what then took 
place was also quite commonly effaced, although some did not sink to 
this level of vulgarity. Refugee testimony was eagerly sought, although 
only if it lent support to the STV, and evaluations by State Department 
specialists and other knowledgeable commentators that gave a more 
nuanced (and in retrospect, essentially accurate) picture were dismissed 
as lacking utility. There was massive outrage, reaching its peak in early 
1977 when the death toil was still well below that of phase I, with a 
record of deception that is highly illuminating. 117 As something like the 
STV came to be realized in 1977—78, its horrors were downplayed in 
official government circles, and subsequent U.S. support for Pol Pot 
arouses little notice. 

Phase III proceeded along a dual course. In a fanciful reconstruction 
that maintains the level of integrity shown throughout, it is alleged that 
“left-wing skepticism 3 * so dominated Western opinion and governments 
that there was “silence 3 * throughout the DK period; the wide accept¬ 
ance of this thesis, despite the quality of the evidence provided and its 
manifest absurdity* counts as yet another example of how readily the 
most implausible contentions can become doctrine, as long as they are 
serviceable. In Indochina, a new phase of Western concern about the 
victimization of Cambodia began, with outrage now directed not 
against Pol Pot but against the new oppressors who overthrew him. The 
United States took a leading role in orchestrating the new concern, 
which combined Chinese and U.S. interest in “bleeding Vietnam* 3 with 
a renewed exhibition of the Western conscience, properly bounded to 
