2.1. JERZY* POPIELUSZKO 
VERSUS A HUNDRED RELIGIOUS 
VICTIMS IN LATIN AMERICA 

A useful comparison can be made between the mass media’s treatment 
of Jerzy Popieluszko, a Polish priest murdered by the Polish police in 



38 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


October 1984* and the media’s coverage of priests murdered within the 
ILS, sphere of influence. In our model* Popieluszko, murdered in an 
enemy state* will be a worthy victim* whereas priests murdered in our 
client states in Latin America will be unworthy. The former may be 
expected to elicit a propaganda outburst by the mass media; the latter 
will not generate sustained coverage. 


2.1,1. Quantitative aspects of 
coverage. 

Table 2-1 shows* on row 1* the coverage of Popieluszko’s murder and 
the trial of his murderers by the New York Times, Time and Newsweek, 
and CBS News. Rows 2 through 5 summarize the coverage in the same 
media given to religious personnel murdered in Latin America by 
agents of U.S* client states: 1 Row 2 shows the coverage given seventy- 
two individuals in a list of Latin American religious “martyrs” named 
by Penny Lernoux in her book Cry of the People ; row 3 describes media 
coverage of twenty-three priests, missionaries* and other religious 
workers murdered in Guatemala between January 1980 and February 
1985. Row 4 summarizes the coverage of the murder of Archbishop 
Oscar Romero* of El Salvador, shot by an assassin in March 1980* Row 
5 shows the level of media coverage of four U.S. women religious 
workers* murdered in El Salvador in December 1980. 

The coverage of the Popieluszko murder not only dwarfs that of the 
unworthy victims, it constitutes a major episode of news management 
and propaganda. Nothing comparable can be found for victims within 
the free world. 2 It can be seen that the New York Times featured the 
Popieluszko case on its front page on ten different occasions* and the 
intensity of coverage assured that its readers would know who Popie¬ 
luszko was* that he had been murdered* and that this sordid violence 
had occurred in a Communist state. By contrast* the public would not 
have seen mention of the names of Father Augusto Ramirez Monast- 
erio* father superior of the Franciscan order in Guatemala, murdered 
in November 1983* or Father Miguel Angel Montufar* a Guatemalan 
priest who disappeared in the same month that Popieluszko was killed 
in Poland* or literally dozens of other religious murder victims in the 
