
Shawcross attributes this “left-wing skepticism,” which had such 
awesome consequences because of the influence of the left on Western 



292 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


institutions* in part to Vietnamese propaganda. Vietnam’s “spokesmen 
had undercut the refugee stories about Khmer Rouge conduct,” he 
writes* “thus adding to disbelief in them* particularly on the Western 
left,” 108 which naturally takes its cues from Hanoi and closely parrots 
its doctrines* according to approved dogma—although it is interesting 
that Shawcross also insinuates that the influence of Hanoi extended 
beyond its acolytes. And why not? If we have reached the point of 
claiming that the Western left silenced the media and governments, 
why not proceed to maintain that even outside these dangerous circles* 
Vietnamese propaganda is a powerful force in shaping opinion? Natu¬ 
rally Shawcross does not make even a pretense of providing any evi¬ 
dence for what he knows perfectly well to be the sheerest fantasy* from 
beginning to end. 

We may place this outlandish explanation of the “silence” of the 
West alongside the similar claims that State Department Communists 
lost China, that the media are threatening the foundations of democ¬ 
racy with their “adversarial stance,” etc. The reaction, however* was 
not ridicule, but rather great enthusiasm. To cite just one typical exam¬ 
ple, David Hawk observes that Shawcross “attributes the world's indif¬ 
ference” to “the influence of antiwar academics and activists on the 
American left who obfuscated Khmer Rouge behavior* denigrated the 
post-1975 refugee reports and denounced the journalists who got those 
stories,” 109 He accepts this thesis as valid but cites no evidence either 
for the ^indifference” to the atrocities* which were being denounced 
worldwide as genocidal* or for the alleged behavior of the American 
left, nor does he explain the mechanisms whereby this behavior, had 
it existed, could have controlled the mainstream media, or even margin¬ 
ally influenced them. Convenient mythologies require neither evidence 
nor logic. Nor do they require any attention to Hawk’s own perform¬ 
ance at the time, as an Amnesty International official and specialist on 
Southeast Asia. The AI Annual Report for 1977 noted that the number 
of alleged executions in Cambodia was “fewer than during the preced¬ 
ing year,” and while it summarizes a number of reports of executions 
and disappearances, its account is restrained. The 1978 Annual Report, 
while stronger in its allegations of violence, pointed out that refugee 
reports, on which it was necessary to rely heavily, “are often imprecise 
or conflicting,” thus leaving AI and Hawk in the Shawcross-Hawk 
category of those who “denigrated the post-1975 refugee reports.” It is 
so easy to moralize in retrospect. 

Shawcross develops his thesis further in interesting ways. 110 To show 
that Western commentators refused to recognize that “the Khmer 
Rouge was a Marxist-Leninist government,” he states that British jour- 




THE INDOCHINA WARS (ll): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 293 


nalist John Pilger “constantly compared” the Khmer Rouge with the 
Nazis, suppressing the fact that he explicitly compared their actions 
with “Stalin’s terror,” as Pilger noted in a response to one of the many 
reviews that repeated Shawcross’s inventions. 111 Shawcross claims fur¬ 
ther that the present authors “were to believe for years” that “the 
refugees were unreliable, that the CIA was cooking up a bloodbath to 
say, ‘We told you so.’ ” He cites our one article {The Nation, 1977), in 
which there is no hint of any such thesis, as there is none elsewhere. 
In that article we were clear and explicit, as also subsequently, that 
refugee reports left no doubt that the record of Khmer Rouge atrocities 
was “substantial and often gruesome,” and that “in the case of Cam¬ 
bodia, there is no difficulty in documenting major atrocities and oppres¬ 
sion, primarily from the reports of refugees,” 113 To support his 
contention with regard to our alleged denial of the reliability of re¬ 
fugees, Shawcross cites our comment on the need to exercise care in 
analyzing refugee reports, carefully suppressing the fact that we are 
quoting Ponchaud, his primary source, and that the comment he cites 
is a familiar truism. His reference to the CIA cooking up a bloodbath 
is pure fantasy, although we might add that by the time he wrote, 
although after our book appeared, Michael Vickery did present evi¬ 
dence that the Barron-Paul Reader^ Digest account was in part a CIA 
disinformation effort. 113 Shawcross states further his view, “contrary to 
Chomsky and Herman,” that the U.S, government was “remarkably 
inactive” in anti-Khmer Rouge propaganda. We proposed no U.S. 
government role whatsoever in orchestrating the deceit we docu¬ 
mented, by William Shawcross and others, and in fact endorsed State 
Department reports as the most plausible then available. And so on, 
throughout. 

But Shawcross and others who are deeply offended by our challenge 
to the right to lie in the service of one’s favored state understand very 
well that charges against dissident opinion require no evidence and that 
ideologically useful accusations will stand merely on the basis of end¬ 
less repetition, however ludicrous they may be—even the claim that the 
American left silenced the entire West during the Pol Pot period. 

Shawcross’s charges against other enemies follow the same pattern— 
another factor, presumably, in the appeal of his message. Thus in 
pursuit of his fashionable quest to attribute primary responsibility for 
the continuing tragedy of Cambodia to Vietnam, not to those who were 
