freedom to perform a function on behalf of the polity/* 1 Lewis cites 
Supreme Court Justice Powell, who observed: “no individual can obtain 
for himself the information needed for the intelligent discharge of his 
political responsibilities. * * * By enabling the public to assert meaningful 
control over the political process, the press performs a crucial function 
in effecting the societal purpose of the First Amendment.” Therefore, 
as Judge Gurfein ruled in supporting the right of the New York Times 



298 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


to publish the Pentagon Papers after the government had failed to show 
any threat of a breach of security but only the possibility of embarrass¬ 
ment: “a cantankerous press, an obstinate press, a ubiquitous press 
must be suffered by those in authority in order to preserve the even 
greater values of freedom of expression and the right of the people to 
know.” 

We do not accept the view that freedom of expression must be 
defended in instrumental terms, by virtue of its contribution to some 
higher good; rather, it is a value in itself. But that apart, these ringing 
declarations express valid aspirations, and beyond that, they surely 
express the self-image of the American media. Our concern in this book 
has been to inquire into the relation between this image and the reality. 
In contrast to the standard conception of the media as cantankerous, 
obstinate, and ubiquitous in their search for truth and their inde¬ 
pendence of authority, we have spelled out and applied a propaganda 
model that indeed sees the media as serving a “societal purpose,” but 
not that of enabling the public to assert meaningful control over the 
political process by providing them with the information needed for the 
intelligent discharge of political responsibilities. On the contrary, a 
propaganda model suggests that the “societal purpose” of the media is 
to inculcate and defend the economic, social, and political agenda of 
privileged groups that dominate the domestic society and the state. The 
media serve this purpose in many ways: through selection of topics, 
distribution of concerns, framing of issues, filtering of information, 
emphasis and tone, and by keeping debate within the bounds of accept¬ 
able premises. We have sought to show that the expectations of this 
model are realized, and often considerably surpassed, in the actual 
practice of the media in a range of crucial cases. We quite agree with 
Chief Justice Hughes, whom Lewis also cites, on “the primary need of 
a vigilant and courageous press” if democratic processes are to function 
in a meaningful way. But the evidence we have reviewed indicates that 
this need is not met or even weakly approximated in actual practice. 

It is frequently asserted that the media were not always as indepen¬ 
dent, vigilant, and defiant of authority as they allegedly are today; 
rather, the experiences of the past generation are held to have taught 
