
INTHOUUCTJON XXlil 


as a whole during the eight year period 1991 to 1998.” 34 However* as 
these deaths resulted from U.S. policy, and Secretary of State Madeleine 
Albright declared on national television that these 500,000 child deaths 
were “worth it we would expect the U.S. media to find these victims 
unworthy, to give them little attention and less indignation, and to find 
the word “genocide” inapplicable to this case. The table shows that this 
expectation was realized in media practice. 

The case for severe media bias suggested by the usage of genocide 
shown in the table is strengthened by the fact that, despite the great 
media attention to and indignation over the abuse of the Kosovo Albani¬ 
ans by the Serbs in 1998-1999, this mistreatment was almost certainly 
less severe than that meted out to the Kurds in Turkey in the 1990s and 
to the Hast Timorese by the Indonesian army and paramilitary forces in 
East Timor in 1999. Deaths in Kosovo on all sides in the year before the 
NATO bombing were estimated by U.S. and other Western sources to 
number no more than 2,000, and the Serb assault and expulsions that 
followed and accompanied the NATO bombing campaign also appear to 
have resulted in deaths in the low thousands (an intensive postwar search 
for graves had yielded some 3,000 bodies by August 2000, not all of them 
Albanian civilians or necessarily victims of the Serbs). 36 Deaths in the 
Turkish war on the Kurds in the 1990s were estimated to be 30,000 or 
more, a large fraction Kurdish civilians, with refugee numbers running to 
2 to 3 million. In East Timor, where the Indonesian military organized 
and collaborated with a paramilitary opposition to a U.N.-sponsored in¬ 
dependence referendum held on August 30, 1999, an estimated 5,000 to 
6,000 East Timorese civilians were slaughtered even before the referen¬ 
dum vote that rejected Indonesian rule, which unleashed a furious In¬ 
donesian army-paramilitary assault on East Timorese. 37 

The double standard reflected in the politicized use of “genocide” is 
applicable to the treatment of news events more broadly, with the media 
regularly focusing on the abuse of worthy victims and playing down or 
neglecting altogether the plight of unworthy victims. As an illustration, 
we may consider the contrasting media treatment of the alleged killing of 
some forty Albanians by the Serbs at Racak, Kosovo, on January 15, 
1999, and the Indonesian army-militia killing of "'up to 200” East Timo¬ 
rese at Liquica in East Timor on April 6,1999.^ The former was seen as 
useful by U.S. officials, 39 who were Trying to ready the U.S. and Western 
publics for an imminent NATO attack on Yugoslavia. Although the facts 
in the Racak killings, which occurred in the course of fighting between 
the Serbian military and Kosovo Liberation Army insurgents within 
Yugoslavia, were and remain in dispute—and recent evidence raises fur¬ 
ther doubts about the NATO-KLA account of events there 40 —the deaths 



XXIV INTRODUCTION 


were immediately denounced and featured by US. and NATO officials 
as an intolerable “massacre.” The U.S. mainstream media did the same 
and gave this reported massacre heavy and uncritical attention. 41 This 
helped create the moral basis for the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia that 
began on March 24, 1999. 

The Liquica killings of East Timorese seeking refuge in a Catholic 
church by Indonesian-organized militia forces were indisputably a “mas¬ 
sacre ” apparently involved many more victims than at Racak, and it took 
place in a territory illegally occupied by a foreign state (Indonesia). It was 
also neither a unique event nor was it connected to any warfare, as in 
Kosovo—it was a straightforward slaughter of civilians. But U.S. officials 
did not denounce this massacre—in fact, active U.S. support of the In¬ 
donesian military continued throughout this period and up to a week 
after the referendum, by which time 85 percent of the population had 
been driven from their homes and well over 6,000 civilians had been 
slaughtered. The US. mainstream media followed the official lead. For 
a twelve-month period following the date of each event, the mentions 
of Racak by the five media entities cited in the table exceeded mentions 
of Liquica by 4.1 to i, and mentions of “massacre” at the two sites was 
in a ratio of 6.7 to 1. The greater length of accounts of the Racak event 
elevates the ratio to 14 to 1 as measured by word count. Newsweek) 
which mentioned Racak and its “massacre” nine times, failed to mention 
Liquica once. 

Thus, with the cooperation of the media, the Racak killings were effec¬ 
tively used by US. officials to ready the public for war, not only by their 
intensive coverage but also by their taking the official allegations of mas¬ 
sacre at face value. In the same time frame, the media’s treatment of the 
indisputable massacre at Liquica was insufficient in volume or indigna¬ 
tion to mobilize the public, in accord with the US. policy of leaving the 
management of events in East Timor to the U.S. ally Indonesia. 


Legitimating Versus Meaningless 
Third World Elections 

In chapter 3 we show that the mainstream media have followed a govern¬ 
ment agenda in treating elections in client and disfavored states. In El 
Salvador in the 1980s, the U.S. government sponsored several elections 
to demonstrate to the U.S. public that our intervention there was ap¬ 
proved by the local population; whereas when Nicaragua held an election 
in 1984, the Reagan administration tried to discredit it to prevent legiti- 



