
Recall that we are now evaluating the remaining component of the 
Freedom House thesis: that the media were suppressing the American 
victory in their antiestablishment zeal. In fact* they were reporting the 
story accurately in a narrow sense* but completely within the frame¬ 
work of the government propaganda system—never questioned, in a 
shameful display of media servility. We may imagine what the reaction 
would be to a comparable performance on the part of the Nazi or Soviet 
press, Braestrup’s final comment that “a free society deserves better” 
of its media (I, 728) is accurate enough* although not quite in the sense 
intended in the Freedom House study. 

As throughout the war* the standpoint of the media continued to 
reflect the perceptions and attitudes of the American military; for ex¬ 
ample* an American official who observed: “What the Vietcong did was 
occupy the hamlets we pacified just for the purpose of having the allies 
move in and bomb them. By their presence* the hamlets were de¬ 
stroyed,” 133 The same New York Times report from Binh Dinh Prov¬ 
ince—the “showcase” province for pacification—indicates this had 
been going on* unreported* well before the Tet offensive: “The enemy 
moves in December—which several military men called a 'softening up* 
for the offensive—resulted in a wave of allied air strikes on villages. 
Hundreds of homes were destroyed.” 

The U,S. military “resistance”—to borrow the Freedom House ter¬ 
minology—took the same form elsewhere. Robert Shaplen reported 
from the scene that in Saigon* 

A dozen separate areas, comprising perhaps sixty or seventy 
blocks* had been totally burned out. These were almost all resi¬ 
dential areas. , , , Most of the damage was the result of rocket 
attacks by American armed helicopters or other planes, though 
some of it had been caused by artillery or ground fighting. ... A 
modem ten-million-dollar textile plant* containing forty thousand 
spindles* was entirely destroyed by bombs because it was sus¬ 
pected of being a Vietcong hideout. 124 

Le Monde correspondent Jean-Claude Pomonti observed that 

in the popular suburbs, the Front [NLF] has proven that the only 
way to eliminate its control is through systematic destruction. To 
dislodge it* the air force had to level many residential areas. Flee¬ 
ing the bombardments* tens of thousands of refugees have poured 
into the center of the city. 125 



222 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


