



WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS 


office, also stated before a congressional committee in February 1984 
that “beyond any reasonable doubt” D’Aubuisson had “planned and 
ordered the assassination” of Archbishop Romero, and White gave 
details on the planning meeting and the subsequent execution of the 
trigger man to keep him quiet, 42 Further evidence of D’Aubuisson’s 
involvement in the murder came to light with the confession of Roberto 
Santivanez, a former high official in Salvadoran intelligence. According 
to Santivanez, the murder of Romero was planned and carried out by 
D’Aubuisson with the aid of former national guardsmen of Somoza, but 
“under the protection of General Garcia and Colonel Carranza.” 43 
Pyes’s and Becktund’s informants also indicated that D’Aubuisson was 
a subordinate and political ally of Carranza, who was the number two 
man in the Salvadoran military until his ouster under U.S. pressure in 
December 1980, Carranza then moved over to head the Treasury Police. 
D’Aubuisson also worked with the National Guard’s G-2 central intelli¬ 
gence office while the guard was headed by General Eugenio Vides 
Casanova, Pyes and Becklund write that “During the time Vides com¬ 
manded the Guard, active-duty military officers working with the G-2 
were linked in State Department cables to the March 1980 assassination 
of Archbishop Oscar Amulfo Romero... .’ >44 Note that Vides Casanova 
became minister of defense, the post he still holds, under the Duarte 
government. 

In short, there was substantial evidence concerning the identity of 
Romero’s murderers, and there were significant links of the murders to 
the highest officials of the Salvadoran military establishment. In fact, 
a judicial investigation in El Salvador headed by Judge Atilio Ramirez 
quickly pointed a finger at D’Aubuisson and General Medrano, a U.S. 
protege in El Salvador. But Ramirez soon fled the country after several 
threats and an attempt on his life, and active pursuit of the case in El 
Salvador ended. In exile. Judge Ramirez claimed that the criminal- 
investigation group of the police didn’t arrive at the scene of the crime 
till four days after it was committed, and that neither the police nor the 
attorney general provided his court with any evidence. He concluded 
that there was “undoubtedly” a “kind of conspiracy to cover up the 
murder” from the very beginning. 45 

Needless to say, Judge Ramirez’s testimony was not featured in the 
U.S. media, nor was the accumulating evidence of D’Aubuisson’s in¬ 
volvement given significant play. It was back-page material at best, 
treated matter-of-factly and never put in a framework of indignation 
and outrage by the use of emotive language or by asking allies of 
Romero to comment on the evidence, and it never elicited strident 
demands for justice. To this day one will find no mention of the fact 


m 



58 manufacturing consent 


that the effective rulers of this "fledgling democracy” are military of¬ 
ficers who were closely associated with D’Aubuisson and his cabal and 
may well have been implicated in the assassination. 

After D J Aubuisson was caught in a raid on May 8*1980, with docu¬ 
ments showing that he was planning a coup and with evidence of his 
involvement in the murder of Romero, he was arrested and faced with 
the threat of trial and imprisonment. An assembly of the entire officer 
corps of the Salvadoran army—seven hundred strong—was quickly 
convened* and demanded his release. He was turned loose shortly 
thereafter* with the concurrence of the minister of defense, 46 The 
documents found in his possession dropped out of sight. The security 
forces also raided the legal-aid office of the archbishopric* removing all 
of their files bearing on the assassination. At the previously mentioned 
meeting of the Salvadoran officer corps* Colonel Adolfo Majano, the 
last of the reformers in the "reformist” junta of 1979* was denounced, 
and he quickly exited from the junta, to be replaced by yet another 
hard-liner. The army had expressed its solidarity with the hard-line- 
death-squad right, and the junta was adjusted to meet this new threat 
to the image of a reformist junta* with Duarte advanced to president* 
serving as a figurehead for the benefit of Congress and the media* to 
ensure that arms would flow to the killers. 

The U.S. mass media gave little notice to this important display and 
consolidation of the power of the extreme right* and the semi-official 
vindication of the murderers of Archbishop Romero, This was telling 
evidence about the nature of power in El Salvador and the fictional 
quality of the claim that the government was centrist or reformist. 
Unbiased media would have featured and explained the meaning of this 
information- But these facts contradicted the Carter-Reagan mythol- 
ogy* so the media predictably remained silent about these events and 
continued to perpetuate the myth. On November 29* 1980* following the 
massacre of the leaders of the opposition in San Salvador* the Times 
suggested that there is "a severe challenge to the credibility” of the gov¬ 
ernment, but there is no hint that the revolt of May 1980 had changed 
their view of April 28 that this was a "weak centrist government.” 

The media also adjusted nicely* then and later* to the rehabilitation 
of the probable murderer of Romero and his reintegration into the 
official power structure. As D’Aubuisson sought high office and eventu¬ 
