“Flak” refers to negative responses to a media statement or program. 
It may take the form of letters* telegrams, phone calls, petitions, law¬ 
suits, speeches and bills before Congress, and other modes of com¬ 
plaint, threat, and punitive action. It may be organized centrally or 
locally, or it may consist of the entirely independent actions of in¬ 
dividuals. 

If flak is produced on a large scale, or by individuals or groups with 
substantial resources, it can be both uncomfortable and costly to the 
media. Positions have to be defended within the organization and with¬ 
out, sometimes before legislatures and possibly even in courts. Adver¬ 
tisers may withdraw patronage. Television advertising is mainly of 
consumer goods that are readily subject to organized boycott. During 
the McCarthy years, many advertisers and radio and television stations 
were effectively coerced into quiescence and blacklisting of employees 
by the threats of determined Red hunters to boycott products . Adver¬ 
tisers are still concerned to avoid offending constituencies that might 
produce flak, and their demand for suitable programming is a continu¬ 
ing feature of the media environment. 98 If certain kinds of fact, posi¬ 
tion, or program are thought likely to elicit flak, this prospect can be 
a deterrent. 

The ability to produce flak, and especially flak that is costly and 
threatening, is related to power. Serious flak has increased in close 
parallel with business’s growing resentment of media criticism and the 
corporate offensive of the 1970s and 1980s. Flak from the powerful can 
be either direct or indirect. The direct would include letters or phone 
calls from the White House to Dan Rather or William Paley, or from 
the FCC to the television networks asking for documents used in put¬ 
ting together a program, or from irate officials of ad agencies or corpo¬ 
rate sponsors to media officials asking for reply time or threatening 
retaliation," The powerful can also work on the media indirectly by 
complaining to their own constituencies (stockholders, employees) 
about the media, by generating institutional advertising that does the 
same, and by funding right-wing monitoring or think-tank operations 
designed to attack the media. They may also fund political campaigns 
and help put into power conservative politicians who will more directly 
serve the interests of private power in curbing any deviationism in the 
media. 



a propaganda model 27 


Along with its other political investments of the 1970s and 1980s* the 
corporate community sponsored the growth of institutions such as the 
American Legal Foundation* the Capital Legal Foundation* the Media 
Institute, the Center for Media and Public Affairs* and Accuracy in 
Media (AIM). These may be regarded as institutions organized for the 
