state that Ronald Reagan and the State Department find acceptable. Max 
Singer says that “I did sense that Guatemalans feel that voting is important 
to them.” (This is correct, but Singer was not contemplating the possibility that 
its importance to them might lie in fear and a desire to avoid retribution by 
the omnipresent army.) Regula said that the people were patiently waiting “for 
an opportunity to share in the process of choosing the constituent assembly.” 
According to Simcox, “They know that this was the patriotic thing to do, that 
this was important for their country.” Tom Kahn found that the people he 
talked to in voting lines “expressed a great sense of national pride.” 

4. Absence of any sign of coercion. Father Kenneth Baker stated that 
“there seemed to be a general atmosphere of no intimidation.” Baker didn’t 
say how he sensed this atmosphere, and whether it was assuredly reliable in 
a foreign country observed for a day under military guard. Baker referred to 
the bishops having urged people to vote, but he failed to note their extended 
observations suggesting that a meaningful election couldn’t be held in an 
environment of disappearances, terror, and catastrophic socioeconomic condi¬ 
tions. Jack Brier saw “absolutely no violence. I saw no evidence of direct 
military involvement.” A problem that Brier doesn’t discuss is that if pacifica¬ 
tion is thorough, no violence or substantial military presence will be necessary 
to confirm military choices. There is absolutely no violence or evidence of 
direct military involvement in elections in the Soviet Union. Brier plays dumb, 
pretending that violence on election day is really relevant, and ignoring the 
long-term violence that strips away institutional protections and produces a 
terrorized population. 2 Congressman Mickey Edwards did find a military pres¬ 
ence in Guatemala, but it was not “oppressive”: “We did not find anything to 
indicate that the people in those areas were under any pressure or intimida¬ 
tion,” How hard Edwards looked must remain in doubt. 3 

5 . Amazing turnout. Jack Brier referred to the “surprisingly large turnout,” 
and Ed Simcox found the 60-70 percent turnout “really an incredibly positive 
statistic.” Even the U.S. embassy noted that voting in Guatemala is compul¬ 
sory (although it tried to discount this by citing a Guatemalan official who said 
that the law was only rarely enforced). The official observers, however, never 
mentioned this small matter of a legal requirement, or the need to get an ID 
card stamped, let alone the army warnings and the background of mass killings 
and disappearances. 

6. Human rights improving. Congressman Mickey Edwards found that 
“by all objective observations, the human-rights record in this country has 
improved tremendously over the last two or three years.” He does not say what 
objective observations he is referring to. Max Singer also found that “the 
human-rights record is improving in Guatemala, as near as I can tell,” partly 
because the guerrilla movement has weakened, and that movement has been 
a serious threat to the human rights of the Guatemalan people. Singer was 
asked in the press conference how he determined this improvement. His 
answer was “From the statements of people living in the countryside.” 

1. Reason for the blank and spoiled votes. Some 26 percent of the ballots 
cast in the Guatemalan election, far exceeding the total for any party, were 
