Cruz was given enormous play: he was continually referred to as the 
“main opposition 51 or “leading opponent” of the ruling party (without 
any supporting evidence), and his candidacy was made “an acid test of 
the Sandinistas 5 democratic intentions” {Time* Oct. 29, 1984). For the 
Times, the election would be a “sham” without Cruz (editorial, Oct. 7, 
1984), and its news columns placed “main opposition” Cruz on center 
stage, from which vantage point he could regularly denounce the pro¬ 
ceedings as a “farce” or sham. 102 The Times did have one good back¬ 
page article that provided evidence that Cruz had not intended to run 
or would not have been allowed to run by his closest Nicaraguan allies 
and U.S, officials, and that his function was, as we stated, to discredit 
the election by pretending to be interested, thus capturing press atten¬ 
tion, 103 But this low-keyed article stood alone and did not alter the 
unremitting focus on the alleged exclusion of this alleged main opposi¬ 
tion as the centerpiece of the Nicaraguan election drama. 

In focusing on an alleged “main opposition” in Nicaragua, which 
voluntarily chose not to run, while ignoring a real main opposition in 
El Salvador, excluded by force and plan, the mass media simply 
adopted without question the government’s propaganda framework. 
Sources that would speak to the condition of the “main opposition” in 
El Salvador and the significance of its exclusion—both Salvadorans and 
foreign observers—were simply ignored. 104 In the case of the Nicara¬ 
guan election, in contrast, Cruz and U.S. government officials were 
given the floor to present their themes, which were transmitted on a 
daily basis with no accompanying notice of their possible falsity and 
manipulative intent, in perfect accord with the expectations of a propa¬ 
ganda model. 

The Reagan administration not only dangled Cruz before the media, 
it tried hard to induce or bribe other candidates in the Nicaraguan 
election to withdraw in order to fulfil the prophecy of a meaningless 
election. The brazenness of this intervention by a great power was 
remarkable, but the U.S. media gave it minimal attention. They never 
denounced it as antidemocratic, they failed to link it to Cruz’s campaign 
(with its suggestion of a larger effort to discredit by boycott), and they 
never suggested that voter “turnout” was more meaningful given the 
active U.S. campaign to discredit the election. On October 31, 1984, 






LEGITIMIZING VERSUS MEANINGLESS THIRD WORLD ELECTIONS 127 


Stephen Kinzer noted that senior U.S. officials confirmed accounts of 
“regular contacts 51 with the Nicaraguan parties. Kinzeris article is head¬ 
lined “Nicaraguan Parties Cite Sandinista and U.S. Pressure* 15 the 
headline and article itself equating the government's aid to, and agree¬ 
ments with* its own political parties with U.S. intervention to get the 
Nicaraguan parties to boycott the election! CBS, Newsweek, and Time 
ignored the U.S. bribe program entirely. Time gave great emphasis to 
the number of candidates and the withdrawal of several* but it never 
once mentioned that this was helped along by U.S, connivance, bribes* 
and pressure. It even quotes without comment the State Department 
fabrication that “it did not try to influence the outcome of the election” 
(Nov. 19* 1984). All substantive evidence is placed in the black hole. In 
the same article, Time asserts that “the U.S. had pushed hard for 
elections in which all parties felt free to participate, 55 a fabrication of 
considerable audacity. 

As regards the scope of electoral options in Nicaragua* the Irish 
delegation noted that “The [political parties] law guarantees participa¬ 
tion to political parties of all ideologies,” an interesting point validated 
by a range of political opinion in the contesting parties far wider than 
that found in El Salvador and Guatemala (or the United States). 

LASA states that “No major political tendency in Nicaragua was 
denied access to the electoral process in 1984” (p. 18). This* of course, 
could not be said of El Salvador and Guatemala. These important 
features of the Nicaraguan law and practice were not mentioned in the 
U.S. media or compared with those of the client states. 

The Irish delegation stressed two facts about Cruz as the “main 
opposition. 55 First, 

The delegation found no evidence that these parties [the three 
small Cruz-related parties that boycotted the election] had wide 
support within the country. Speaking with many political figures* 
including representatives of the legitimate opposition parties, it 
became clear that the intention of Arturo Cruz to stand for elec¬ 
tion was dubious from the start. . . . While considerable coverage 
was given to these parties in the international press^ members of 
the delegation found that their impact among the population was 
scant and few people supported their policies (p. 7). 

Second, the Irish delegation stressed the fact that the populace was free 
not to vote or to spoil votes* and the low level of both, “despite the 
abstentionism promoted by 55 the Cruz parties, deflated their claims to 
any serious support (p. 7)- The LASA report reached similar conclu- 



128 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


sionSj based on an extensive review of the evidence, namely: (i) that 
“circumstantial evidence” indicates the strong probability that Cruz 
