in the Freedom House study, but merely note, once again, that we have here 
not a work of scholarship but rather a government propaganda tract. 

Max Frankel commented in the New York Times (Feb. 11,1968) that pres¬ 
sures at home and in Vietnam “are thought to have raised once again the 
temptation of further military escalation” (I, 584, italicized by Braestrup for 
emphasis as an example of raising “straw men”). Frankel was quite accurate 
in this measured statement. As Braestrup points out, “Wheeler and Westmore¬ 
land agreed that it was also a good time to urge a bolder Vietnam strategy, with 
more troops to gain quicker results: i.e., forays into Laos, Cambodia, and 
possibly that part of North Vietnam just above the DMZ.” Why then the 
“straw man” charge? Because, Braestrup objects, escalation “was hardly a 
tempting prospect for Johnson” (his emphasis), hardly Frankel’s point. Brae¬ 
strup claims further that Frankel, in this article, suggested “that escalation— 
notably a reserve call-up—was probable” (I, 586). Frankel’s article does not 
appear in the accompanying volume of documents; turning to it, we discover 
that Braestrup’s claim is another Freedom House exclusive, suggested no¬ 
where in Frankel’s article, which is noteworthy only for its standard reiteration 
of government propaganda about the goal of bringing “security” to “the people 
of South Vietnam”—by B-52 bombing of villages, the exploits of Task Force 
Barker at and around My Lai at just that time as part of the general ravaging 
of Quang Ngai Province, etc. 

After television, Newsweek is the worst offender. Let us therefore inquire 
further into its misdeeds. In what Braestrup describes as “Newsweek*^ major 
statement on the Thieu-Ky regime,” a March 18 feature entitled “Vietnam: A 
Reappraisal,” the journal commented accurately in an editorial entitled “The 
Political Morass” that “land reform, a vital element in any effort to win the 
loyalty of the peasantry, has not been tackled seriously” (I, 534-36), a truism 
familiar to everyone from the American high command to officials in Washing¬ 
ton. Braestrup comments: “It is difficult, once again, to fathom Newsweek* s 
logic. Surely, neither Newsweek nor the Vietnamese peasant expected the 
regime to tackle land reform seriously in the aftermath of Tet.” It is perfectly 
obvious that in this “reappraisal,” Newsweek is referring to the general picture, 
not specifically to the post-Tet period of one month. 

According to Braestrup, “Newsweek, throughout the February-March 1968 
period, was to refer, in passing, to the ‘wily’ Giap, ‘tough’ North Vietnamese 
regulars, ‘ominous’ enemy activity, and in general, to a foe without setbacks 
or flaws” (I, 229). Turning to the facts, on March 11, Newsweek presented an 
analysis in which it reported that the Communists “were still plagued by the 
confusion that is characteristic of all military operations.” The report (II, 2i6f.) 
goes on to describe “inexplicable” failure to blow up a crucial bridge, failure 
to use main forces adequately to maintain momentum, misassessment of popu- 



lar moods and U.S.-ARVN tactics, inadequate preparation of troops, etc., 
concluding that “the communists did not achieve most of their objectives.” 
The following week’s article on Khe Sanh reports a marine view that “Charlie 
