ease of hiding in the heavy Turkish traffic—which directly contradicts 
the SHK claim that the Bulgarian secret police know everything, and 
that Agca's stay in Sofia must therefore have been by Bulgarian official 
plan—was never picked up in the U.S. mass media's coverage of the 
Rome trial. 

The most striking deficiencies of the mass media's handling of the 
basic SHK claims, however, was their remarkable naivete in the face 
of the pseudoscientific speculations of SHK and the accumulating vio¬ 
lations of elementary principles of plausible deniability. The preposter¬ 
ous SHK claims—without a vestige of evidence—that Agca had been 
recruited by the KGB in Turkey for future work, and that he took on 
the appearance of a right-winger as a “cover," were not ridiculed, and 
were not evaluated when presented as purported truth. 45 There was 
never any discussion in the mass media of the fact that the thesis of 
prior recruitment and careful cultivation of Agca's cover in Turkey was 
flatly inconsistent with the claim that he was brought to Sofia for a 
lengthy stay for instructions. With regard to Agca's alleged open deal¬ 
ings with Bulgarians in Rome, the mass media simply refused to discuss 
the fact that the alleged professionalism and use of the right-wing Turk 
as a “cover” had disappeared. 

As regards the alternative model, and the likelihood that Agca had 
been encouraged and coached, here also the mass media refused to 
explore these dissonant possibilities. They simply would not examine 
and discuss the convenience of the newly discovered plot for so many 
Western interests; the huge time Jag in the naming of Bulgarians; Agca's 
prison conditions and prison contacts; reports of meetings, offers, and 
threats to Agca to induce him to talk; and the compromised character 
of the Italian police and intelligence agencies. This involved the media 
in the suppression of important documents. 

As one important instance, the July 12, 1984, Italian Report of the 
Parliamentary Commission on the Masonic Lodge P -2 describes in great 
detail the penetration of this massive neo-Fascist conspiracy into the 
military establishment, secret services, press, and judiciary, among oth¬ 
ers. This report was newsworthy in its own right, but it also had a 
bearing on the Bulgarian Connection case, as it addressed characteris¬ 
tics of Italian institutions that were directly involved in making and 



164 manufacturing consent 


prosecuting the case against the Bulgarians, The New York Times, Time , 
Newsweek, and CBS Evening News never mentioned the publication of 
this report. 

As a second major illustration, one year later, in July 1985, the Crimi¬ 
