
T4S manufacturing consent 


SHK finally settled firmly on the idea that quelling the Polish Soli¬ 
darity movement was the real Soviet-Bulgarian motive. But this theory 
is as implausible as its predecessor when we take account of timing and 
elementary cost-benefit analysis. Agca was allegedly recruited in Tur¬ 
key long before Solidarity existed. In a variant Sterling version of the 
timing of his recruitment, Agca was hired by the Bulgarians in July 1980, 
which was still prior to the Gdansk shipyard strike, and thus before 
Solidarity appeared a credible threat to Soviet control. The risks and 
costs of an assassination attempt would seem heavy—and, in fact, the 
costs to the Soviet Union and Bulgaria were severe based merely on the 
widespread belief in their involvement, even in the absence of credible 
evidence. The supposed benefits from the act are also not plausible. 
The assassination of the pope, especially if blamed on the Soviet Union, 
would infuriate and unify the Poles and strengthen their opposition to 
a Soviet-dominated regime. And the further costs in damaged relations 
with Western Europe—which were extremely important to the Soviet 
Union in 1981, with the gas pipeline being negotiated and with the 
placement of new U.S. missiles in Western Europe a major Soviet 
concern—would seem to militate against taking foolish risks. 12 

A second problem with the SHK model is that Agca had threatened 
to kill the pope in 1979 at the time of a papal visit to Turkey—again, 
long before Solidarity existed. This suggests that Agca and the Turkish 
right had their own grievances against the pope and a rationale for 
assassinating him that was independent of any Soviet influence. It was 
partly for this reason that SHK argue that Agca was recruited by the 
Soviet Union in Turkey before the pope’s visit there, setting him up for 
the later attack. But not only is this pure speculation unsupported by 
a trace of evidence, it fails to explain why the entire Fascist press, not 
just Agca, assailed the pope’s visit in 1979. Was the entire Fascist right 
serving Soviet ends? The only time this issue was ever raised in the mass 
media, on the “McNeil-Lehrer News Hour” of January 5, 1983, Paul 
Henze stated in no uncertain terms that “there was no [press] opposi¬ 
tion” to the pope’s visit in 1979. The Turkish journalist Ugur Mumcu, 
however, assembled a large collection of citations from the Turkish 
rightist press of the time to demonstrate that Henze’s statement was 
false. 13 

A third problem for the SHK model was that Agca was a committed 
rightist, and therefore not a likely candidate for service to the Commu¬ 
nist powers (although perhaps amenable to fingering them as co-con¬ 
spirators in a prison context). SHK strove mightily to make Agca out 
to be a rootless mercenary, but the best they could come up with was 


THE KGB-BULGARIAN PLOT TO KILL THE POPE 149 


the fact that Agca didn't seem to have been registered as a member of 
the Gray Wolves. 14 But all his friends* associates* and affiliations from 
high school days onward were Gray Wolves* and in his travels through 
Europe up to the time of his May 13* 1981, rendezvous* he moved solely 
through the Gray Wolves network. While in prison* Agca addressed a 
letter to Alparslan Turkes* the leader of the Nationalist Action Party 
of Turkey* expressing his continued commitment and loyalty. This 
letter was bothersome to Sterling and Henze as it is inconsistent with 
their depiction of Agca as apolitical, and Sterling dismissed it without 
argument as a “laughably clumsy forgery.” A problem* however* is that 
Agca's letter was introduced as evidence in a trial in Ankara by the 
Turkish military authorities* usually adequate proof for Sterling of 
authenticity. She doesn’t mention this fact or examine their case. Ugur 
Mumcu devotes five pages of his book Agca Dossier to a detailed ac¬ 
count of the Turkes letter* describing the great pains the authorities 
took* including tapping outside experts, to establish its authenticity. 
The conclusion on all sides was that the letter was genuine. 

A fourth problem with the SHK model is the notion that because of 
the efficiency of the Bulgarian secret police, Agca's presence in Sofia 
must have been known to them* and he must therefore have been on 
their payroll. This assumed efficiency is an ideological assumption un¬ 
supported by any evidence and contradicted by actual Bulgarian and 
Soviet performance. There is no evidence that the Bulgarians ever 
identified Agca, who was using a false passport. Furthermore, the con¬ 
tention that the Bulgarian police know everything was refuted in impor¬ 
tant testimony during the Rome trial on September 22* 1985, when Gray 
Wolves official Abdullah Catli stated that many Gray Wolves preferred 
to traverse Bulgaria because it was easy to hide in the large flow of 
Turkish immigrant traffic through that country. 

A fifth problem for the SHK model was the fact that Agca seems to 
have gotten his gun through the Gray Wolves network, not from the 
Bulgarians, who presumably could have slipped it to him quite easily 
in Rome. In her Reader’s Digest article. Sterling traced Agca's gun to 
Horst Grillmaier, an Austrian gun dealer who, according to Sterling, 
had fled behind the Iron Curtain after May 13,1981* to avoid question¬ 
ing in the West. It turned out later, however* that Grillmaier was a 
former Nazi who specialized in supplying right-wing gun buyers; that 
he had not disappeared behind the Iron Curtain at all; and that the gun 
had proceeded through a number of intermediaries, to be transmitted 
to Agca by a Gray Wolves friend- Sterling handles the disintegration 
of the original Grillmaier line by simply shifting to a new conspiratorial 



150 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 

