to ninety for the marines) tell their conflicting version of a marine 
massacre of wounded and captured civilians. The sequence ends with 
a marine describing what took place as a “normal procedure,” with 
“burning them hootches down and digging them Vietnamese people out 
of holes [with grenades and rifle fire] and scattering animals, pigs and 
chickens around like we normally do,” especially after three days in the 
field under brutal conditions. 

The account continues in the same vein. We hear that “American 


THE INDOCHINA WARS (l): VIETNAM 25I 


aircraft dropped six times more bombs on South Vietnam than on the 
Communist North,” and that “most of the enemy troops were native 
southerners” (episode 8)* But no conclusion is suggested, except that 
the purpose of the U.S. bombing of Vietnam, distributed in this curious 
manner and at “twice the tonnage dropped on Germany and Japan in 
World War II,” was to try “to stop North Vietnam from sending 
soldiers and supplies to the South.” Nevertheless, 140,000 made it 
through 1967 according to the U.S, government (episode 7), about half 
the number of South Korean mercenaries and a small fraction of the 
Americans who were destroying South Vietnam. 

The Phoenix program of political assassination is justified at length 
by its director, William Colby, who denies that it was what it was, and, 
for balance, some comments are added by critics in the military and by 
a civilian aide worker, describing apparent random killing and torture. 
The post-Tet military operations are passed over in total silence. After 
Nixon's election in 1968, when these wholesale U-S. massacres began 
in full force, “the war continued,” we learn: “The weapons were Viet- 
cong rockets, the victims were Danang civilians” killed by the Viet 
Cong and North Vietnamese. 

After the breakdown of negotiations in October 1972, “The North 
was again intransigent,” we learn—namely, in demanding that the 
agreements be signed, a fact ignored; and “In South Vietnam, too, the 
agreement was still unacceptable,” the familiar evasion of U.S. respon¬ 
sibility (see “The Paris Peace Agreements, p. 228). The terms of the 
January 1973 agreement are given, but with no indication that the U.S. 
government announced at once its intent to disregard them, as it did. 
Rather, we hear that “to the North Vietnamese and Vietcong, the 
struggle had not ended,” because “Vietnam was still divided.” The facts 
are quite different, as we have seen. They are indeed more accurately 
stated, although briefly, two episodes later (episode 12), although the 
U.S. role is suppressed except by implication: “America was still com¬ 
mitted to South Vietnam,” the narrator says, without noting that this 
commitment to the GVN, identified with South Vietnam by the U.S* 
government and by PBS, is in explicit violation of the agreements 
