Turn: The Decline of the Democrats and the Future of American Politics (New 
York: Hill and Wang, 1986), pp. 37-39 and passim. 

2. Herbert Gans, for example, states that “The beliefs that actually make it 
into the news are professional values that are intrinsic to national journalism 
and that journalists learn on the job... . The rules of news judgment call for 
ignoring story implications ...” (“Are U.S. Journalists Dangerously Liberal?” 
Columbia Journalism Review [Nov.-Dee. 1985], pp. 32-33). In his book Decid¬ 
ing What’s News (New York: Vintage, 1980), Gans contends that media report- 




iw i t>«i iv/ i a vj c J A1 All 


notes to pages xii-xiii 333 


ers are by and large “objective,” but within a framework of beliefs in a set of 
“enduring values” that include “ethnocentrism” and “responsible capitalism,” 
among others. We would submit that if reporters for Pravda were found to 
operate within the constraints of belief in the essential justice of the Soviet 
state and “responsible communism,” this would be found to make any further 
discussion of “objectivity” pointless. Furthermore, as we shall document 
below, Gans greatly understates the extent to which media reporters work 
within a limiting framework of assumptions. 

3. Neoconservative critiques of the mass media commonly portray them as 
bastions of liberal, antiestablishment attacks on the system. They ignore the 
fact that the mass media are large business corporations controlled by very 
wealthy individuals or other corporations, and that the members of what the 
neoconservatives describe as the “liberal culture” of the media are hired 
employees. They also disregard the fact that the members of this liberal culture 
generally accept the basic premises of the system and differ with other mem¬ 
bers of the establishment largely on the tactics appropriate to achieving com¬ 
mon ends. The neoconservatives are simply not prepared to allow deviations 
from their own views. In our analysis in chapter 1, we describe them as playing 
the important role of “enforcers,” attempting to browbeat the media into 
excluding from a hearing even the limited dissent now tolerated. For an 
analysis of the neoconservative view of the media, see Edward S. Herman and 
Frank Brodhead, “Ledeen on the Media,” in The Rise and Fall of the Bulgarian 
Connection (New York: Sheridan Square Publications, 1986), pp. 166-70; 
George Gerbner, “Television: The Mainstreaming of America,” in Business 
and the Media, Conference Report, Yankelovich, Skelly and White, November 
19, 1981; Gans, “Are U.S. Journalists Dangerously Liberal?” 

4. See Walter Lippmann, Public Opinion (1921; reprint, London: Allen & 
Unwin, 1932); Harold Lasswell, “Propaganda,” in Encyclopedia of the Social 
Sciences (New York: Macmillan, 1933); Edward Bemays, Propaganda (New 
