ble for the smaller parties to obtain legislative representation. Parties 
could also qualify quite easily to participate in the election* In 
Guatemala, 4,000 signatures were needed to qualify in 1984, a large 
number and not easy for dissident parties to collect in a society with 
daily political murders* 

Stephen Kinzer and his associates never mentioned these differ¬ 
ences. More generally, the substantial merits of the Nicaraguan elec¬ 
tions were never contrasted with the procedures in the U*S. client 
states, a comparison that would have been most revealing and that 
would have thoroughly undermined the Reagan agenda to which the 
media were committed in their reporting of the election. Time 3 as noted, 
mentions the compromised Salvadoran procedures as if they were meri¬ 
torious* The Times mentioned the transparent voting boxes in El Salva¬ 
dor only once (Richard Meislin, on March 25,1984), repeating without 
question the official line that the purpose of the translucent boxes was 
to prevent fraud. Any other possibility is unmentioned. Newsweek and 
CBS News ignored these matters. 


3,6.3* Rebel disruption into the 
black hole; turnout no longer an 
index of triumph of democracy 

In the Salvadoran election, rebel disruption was a central feature of the 
government's propaganda frame* Because the rebels opposed the elec¬ 
tion, voting by the people proved their rejection of the rebels and 
approval of the army. Turnout was the index of democratic triumph 
and rebel defeat. As we saw, the mass media followed this frame with¬ 
out question. In the case of Nicaragua, the propaganda format was 
reversed—the rebels were the good guys, and the election held by 
the bad guys was condemned in advance. Rebel opposition to the 
election—and efforts at disruption—did not make voting and a large 






122 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


turnout a repudiation of the rebels and approval of the Sandinistas* 

The U.S. mass media once again followed the government agenda* 
even though it meant an exact reversal of the standards they had applied 
in the Salvadoran election * The contras and their supporters urged the 
public not to vote* and interfered with the election process with at least 
as much vigor as (and with more killings than) the rebels in El Salvador* 
Furthermore* voting was more assuredly secret and the citizens were 
