the unfairness and anti-American bias of the media; comment seems 
superfluous* 

While the 1 LS. media rarely strayed from the framework of the state 
propaganda system, others were unconstrained by these limits: for ex¬ 
ample, the Le Monde correspondents cited; or British photo-journalist 
Philip Jones Griffiths, who concluded from his observations on the 
scene that the thousands of civilian victims of the reconquest of Hue 
“were killed by the most hysterical use of American firepower ever 
seen,” and then designated “as the victims of a Communist massa¬ 
cre*” 132 

To comprehend fully the nature of the Freedom House charges, we 
may imagine how the inquiry urged by John Roche might proceed. Who 
else is implicated in the terrible misdeeds that Freedom House per¬ 
ceives? General Westmoreland and the U,S* command in Saigon must 
surely be placed on the docket because of their estimates of early VC 
successes (see appendix 3 for further examples), along with William 
Bundy, assistant secretary of state for Far Eastern affairs, given his 
extreme pessimism. He thought that the Tet offensive was “shattering 
to the South, especially in the area of pacification,” concluding for a 
time that “the South Vietnamese were through,” “they've had it”— 
where “South Vietnamese” excludes the South Vietnamese defending 
their country from a ILS. invasion, as usual* These conclusions, which 
do conform to the Freedom House parody of the media, were based not 
on the press but on “reports from people in the field out in Vietnam,” 
so presumably they too are implicated ( 1 ,625)- Similarly, Lyndon John¬ 
son was guilty, since he seemed “to some degree 'psychologically de¬ 
feated* by the threat to Khe Sanh and the onslaught on the cities of 
Vietnam,” so Braestrup concludes (I, 626, 630)* The same is true of 
Johnson's civilian advisers, given the “air of gloom” among them and 
the “Battle of Bull Run” mood, and the author of the official ILS. 
government military-historical summary, cited earlier; and Dean Ache- 
son and other “Wise Men” who urged a shift of course because of the 
same “undue pessimism” for which the media are condemned by Free¬ 
dom House. Also Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker, who reported that the 
offensive had “disrupted the pacification effort for the time being,” and 
the pacification adviser who reported that in his “showcase” area, 
“pacification does not exist*' (II, 184-86)* 

Further candidates for investigation appear in the Pentagon Papers — 
for example. General Wheeler, who summarized the situation in the 
following terms to the president on February 27, just as Walter Cron- 
kite was speculating about “stalemate,** arousing Freedom House ire: 





THE INDOCHINA WARS (l)l VIETNAM 225 


The enemy is operating with relative freedom in the countryside* 
probably recruiting heavily and no doubt infiltrating NVA units 
and personnel* His recovery is likely to be rapid; his supplies are 
adequate; and he is trying to maintain the momentum of his 
winter-spring offensive- . * - ARVN is now in a defensive posture 
around towns and cities and there is concern about how well they 
will bear up under sustained pressure. The initial attack nearly 
succeeded in a dozen places* and defeat in these places was only 
averted by the timely reaction of US forces* In short* it was a very 
near thing. There is no doubt that the RD Program [pacification] 
has suffered a severe set back. ... To a large extent the VC now 
control the countryside.. . . MACV estimates that US forces will 
be required in a number of places to assist and encourage the 
Vietnamese Army to leave the cities and towns and reenter the 
country. This is especially true in the Delta. 

The media reports that Braestrup derides were rarely as “pessimistic” 
as the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff* whose summary of the 
situation led the president to order “the initiation of a complete and 
searching reassessment of the entire U.S. strategy and commitment in 
South Vietnam*” the Pentagon Papers analyst reports. 1 ** 

The CIA must also be investigated for contributing to the decline of 
“free institutions” by its pessimism. A CIA paper of March I* presuma¬ 
bly uninfluenced by Walter Cronkite* expressed grave doubts about the 
GVN and ARVN and predicted that they might cease “effective func¬ 
tioning in pans of the country,” so that “virtually the entire burden of 
the war would fall on US forces. ” Like Cronkite a few days earlier* they 
expected “no better than a standoff’ in the coming ten months. Penta¬ 
gon systems analysis concluded that the offensive “appears to have 
killed the [pacification] program once and for all*” drawing the conclu¬ 
sion that Braestrup falsely attributes to the media (see appendix 3)* and 
estimated that “our control of the countryside and the defense of the 
urban areas is now at pre-August 1965 levels.” It was because of this 
serious situation—not perceived American successes* as Braestrup inti¬ 
mates—that they recommended what was later to be called “Vietnami- 
zation," 

The civilian analysts in the Pentagon must be charged not only with 
undue pessimism* but also with some of the other crimes of the press. 
For example* they referred to the famous statement that we are de¬ 
stroying South Vietnam in order to save it; citation of this statement 
is the target of much Braestrup scorn. We must also include Colonel 
Herbert Schandler* on whom Braestrup relies for his account of the 



22 6 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 
