Latin American provinces* who were sometimes given substantial cov¬ 
erage in the local press of the countries in which the murders took 
place* 

In fact* none of the extremely prominent victims of murder in Latin 






WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS 39 


America* including Archbishop Romero and the four American church- 
women* received anywhere near the attention accorded Popieluszko. 
We will show below that the quality of treatment of the worthy and 
unworthy victims also differed sharply. While the coverage of the wor¬ 
thy victim was generous with gory details and quoted expressions of 
outrage and demands for justice* the coverage of the unworthy victims 
was low-keyed, designed to keep the lid on emotions and evoking 
regretful and philosophical generalities on the omnipresence of vio¬ 
lence and the inherent tragedy of human life* This qualitative difference 
is already apparent in placement and editorializing: ten front-page 
articles on Popieluszko is a statement about importance* as is the fact 
of three editorials denouncing the Poles, without a single editorial 
denunciation for the murderers of the unworthy victims. 

By comparing rows i and 6 of table 2-1, we can see that for every 
media category the coverage of the worthy victim* Popieluszko, ex¬ 
ceeded that of the entire set of one hundred unworthy victims taken 
together. We suspect that the coverage of Popieluszko may have ex¬ 
ceeded that of all the many hundreds of religious victims murdered in 
Latin America since World War II* as the most prominent are included 
in our hundred. From the table we can also calculate the relative wor¬ 
thiness of the world's victims* as measured by the weight given them 
by the U.S* mass media. The worth of the victim Popieluszko is valued 
at somewhere between 137 and 179 times that of a victim in the U.S, 
client states; 3 or, looking at the matter in reverse, a priest murdered in 
Latin America is worth less than a hundredth of a priest murdered in 
Poland. 

The claim is sometimes made that unworthy victims are so treated 
by the U.S. mass media because they are killed at a great distance* and 
are so unlike ourselves that they are easy to disregard. 4 Poland, how¬ 
ever* is farther away than Central America* and its cultural and business 
links with the United States are not as great as those of Latin American 
countries in general- Three of the religious victims among the twenty- 
three murdered in Guatemala (row 3) were American citizens* a consid¬ 
eration that failed to light a fire under the media. Even the four 
American churchwomen raped and murdered by members of the Sal¬ 
vadoran National Guard failed to elicit attention comparable with that 
accorded Popieluszko. Their relative valuation by the New York Times 
was less than a tenth that of the Polish priest* and we will show later 
that the coverage of these American victims displayed considerably less 
outrage and passion than that of Popieluszko* 5 

The coverage of Popieluszko was somewhat inflated by the fact that 
his murderers were quickly tried, and in a trial that American reporters 






72 religious 8 (10.3) 117.5 (9.9) 1 (10) — — — — 16 (5.1) 

victims in 
Latin America, 

1964-78* 


ft 

O 3 % N 
^ g* S' 

" ft « 

Q» N 

S o S' 

2 a " 


1 * £ 
* o • 


o 

„ O’ £ 

I # " | 


O £ M 

