operation in which a village was destroyed and its population murdered 
or forcibly relocated, a decision that tells us all we need to know about 
the American war in South Vietnam, but that passed without com¬ 
ment, 80 

While the nation agonized about the sentencing of Lieutenant Wil¬ 
liam Galley for his part in the My Lai massacre, a new ground sweep 
in the same area drove some 16,000 peasants from their homes, and a 
year later the camp where the My Lai remnants were relocated in this 
operation was largely destroyed by air and artillery bombardment, the 
destruction attributed to the Viet Cong. 81 These events too passed with 
little notice, and no calls for an inquiry—reasonably enough, since 
these too were normal and routine operations. 

Medical workers at the nearby Canadian-run hospital reported that 
they knew of the My Lai massacre at once but gave it little attention 
because it was not out of the ordinary in a province (Quang Ngai) that 
had been virtually destroyed by ILS. military operations. The highest- 
ranking officer to have faced court-martial charges for the massacre, 
Colonel Oran Henderson, stated that “every unit of brigade size has its 
Mylai hidden some place, 51 although “every unit doesn't have a Riden- 
hour” to expose what had happened, 82 Knowledgeable elements of the 
peace movement also gave the My Lai massacre no special notice, for 
the same reasons. 

The reasons why this particular massacre became a cause c£l£bre 
were explained by Newsweek'^ Saigon bureau chief Kevin Buckley, 
referring to Operation Wheeler Wallawa, with 10,000 enemy reported 
killed, including the victims of My Lai, who were listed in the official 
body count: 

An examination of that whole operation would have revealed the 
incident at My Lai to be a particularly gruesome application of a 
wider policy which had the same effect in many places at many 
times. Of course, the blame for that could not have been dumped 
on a stumblebum lieutenant. Galley was an aberration, but 
“Wheeler Wallawa 5 * was not. 

The real issue concerning this operation, Buckley cabled to the U.S. 
office of Newsweek, was not the “indiscriminate use of firepower,” as 



198 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


is often alleged. Rather* “it is charges of quite discriminating use—as 
a matter of policy* in populated areas*” as in this operation or many 
others* among them Operation Speedy Express* with thousands of 
civilians murdered and many others driven to refugee and prison camps 
