an important landmark in the escalation of violence in El Salvador and 
in its effect on the newly appointed conservative archbishop of San 
Salvador, Oscar Romero. Rutilio Grande was a Jesuit, the pastor of 
Aguilares, and a progressive who helped organize peasants in self-help 
groups. He was strongly opposed by the local landlords, police, and 
military commanders, but he was a national figure in the Salvadoran 
church and was a friend of the archbishop. Rutilio Grande was shot to 
death, along with a teenager and a seventy-two-year-old peasant, while 
on his way to Mass on March 12,1977. According to a church autopsy, 
the bullets that riddled the priest were of the same caliber as the 



WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS 47 


Manzer guns used by the police. "By ‘coincidence, 1 all telephone com¬ 
munications in the area were cut off within an hour of the triple assassi¬ 
nation. Police patrols normally active in the region mysteriously 
disappeared/* 13 Archbishop Romero wrote to the president of El Salva¬ 
dor, Arturo Armando Molina, urging a thorough investigation, which 
was promised. A week later, the church having established that it was 
probably police bullets that had killed the three victims, Romero wrote 
a harsher letter to Molina, noting the absence of a promised official 
report and pointing out that comments, "many of them unfavorable to 
your government/* have been made. With continued inaction, Romero 
threatened to refuse church participation in any official government 
event unless the murders were investigated and the killers brought to 
justice. Romero’s biographer writes: 

Six weeks later, the lawyer chosen by Romero to follow the case 
reported “an embarrassing and clear indifference toward the in¬ 
vestigation on the part of state organizations.” A suspect ordered 
arrested by a judge was living unconcernedly in El Paisnal, and 
no one had ordered the bodies exhumed and examined. The bul¬ 
lets are still in the graves. 14 

Rutilio Grande’s murder followed a series of forcible expulsions of 
foreign clergy by the Molina government and several earlier murders 
of church personnel. Romero and the clergy deliberated at great length 
on their course of action in response to this escalation of the violence 
against them. They tried to get out their messages of concern, but many 
were not heard because of newspaper censorship. They finally decided 
to take dramatic action: temporary school closings, and implementation 
of the previously mentioned threat to refuse to support the government 
and other power groups on official occasions. 

This entire package of murder and church response was hardly 
lacking in drama and newsworthiness. Yet murder, the confrontation of 
the desperate church with a repressive state, and the dramatic acts 
carried out to try to mobilize support in its self-defense were subject 
to a virtual blackout in the ILS, mass media. The murder of Rutilio 
Grande was mentioned in Newsweek (“Priests in Peril,” Aug. 1,1977), 
but it never once reached the audiences of the New York Times, Time, 
or CBS News. This was important in allowing the terror to go on 
unimpeded. To paraphrase the New York Times editorial on “murder¬ 
ous Poland”: no publicity and agitation, no containment of terror. 




MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


2.3, ARCHBISHOP OSCAR 
ROMERO 

The murder of Archbishop Oscar Romero, the highest Catholic church 
official in El Salvador* was “big news*” and its political implications 
were enormous* At the time of his murder, Romero had become the 
foremost and most outspoken critic of the policy of repression by 
murder being carried out by the US .-supported military government. 
In his last sermon* he appealed to members of the army and security 
forces to refuse to kill their Salvadoran brethren, a call that enraged the 
officer corps trying to build a lower-class military that was willing to 
kill freely* Romero had been placed on right-wing death lists and 
received threats from the right wing* which from the beginning had 
been closely linked to the army and intelligence services* 15 Only a few 
weeks prior to his murder he had written a forceful letter to President 
Jimmy Carter opposing the imminent granting of U*S* aid to the junta 
as destructive of Salvadoran interests. The Carter administration had 
been so disturbed by Romero’s opposition to its policies that it had 
secretly lobbied the pope to curb the archbishop* 16 

Romero, in short, was not merely an “unworthy” victim, he was an 
important activist in opposition to the local alliance of army and oligar¬ 
chy and to US. policy in El Salvador* The US. media’s news coverage 
of the archbishop’s murder and its follow-up reflected well his threat¬ 
ening role* reaching new levels of dishonesty and propaganda service 
in their coverage of this and related events* 


2.3.1* Details of the murder and 
public response 

The details of the Romero murder provided by the U,S. mass media 
were concise (see table 2-2), While there were expressions of shock and 
distress* there were very few quotations and expressions of outrage by 
supporters of Romero. There were no statements or quotations suggest¬ 
ing that the murder was intolerable and that the guilty must be found 
