joined the junta in March to serve as a fig leaf and public-relations 
agent of the army, but all those who were not satisfied to serve in that 
role depaned. 22 





50 manufacturing CONSENT 


Once the old-guard military had seized control from the progressive 
officers in October 1979, it began a general war of extermination against 
all progressive individuals and organizations in El Salvador. By the end 
of May, church sources reported 1,844 civilian deaths already in 1980, 
a figure that reached 10,000 by the end of the year, almost all at the 
hands of the government. A guerrilla war was forced on the center and 
left by the policy of unconstrained violence of the Carter-supported 
government. The government was not centrist and reformist—it was a 
military regime of the right, closely linked to the terrorist force 
ORDEN and the death squads, and it used them regularly as proxies. 
The paramilitary groups were not uncontrollable—they were doing 
what the army wanted them to do. The paramilitary forces and death 
squads of El Salvador had extensive interlocking relationships with the 
official military and security forces and their U.S. counterparts. There 
was a revolving door of personnel, close cooperation in sharing infor¬ 
mation, funding of the paramilitary groups by the official forces, and 
a division of labor between them. The paramilitary did jobs for which 
the official forces wished to disclaim responsibility. 23 

Although the paramilitary group ORDEN was formally abolished at 
the time of the October 1979 coup, it was secretly maintained and had 
a close relationship with the regular military establishment. According 
to one detailed account. 

The reformers had officially abolished ORDEN, the old informa¬ 
tion network. But . . . military officers suspicious of the young 
reformers secretly reestablished and expanded much of the old 
intelligence system into a grass-roots intelligence network that fed 
names of suspected subversives to military and paramilitary death 
squads. Four days after the coup, D’Aubuisson said in an inter¬ 
view, he was assigned by members of the high command to help 
reorganize ANSESAL [an intelligence communication network] 
inside a military compound under the chief of staffs office—out 
of the reach of civilians in the new junta. 24 

This secret assignment of D’Aubuisson was confirmed by junta member 
Colonel Jaime Abdul Gutierrez, and then Deputy Defense Minister 
Colonel Nicholas Carranza. 25 

