

Chapter 1: A Propaganda Model 

1. See note 4 of the preface. 

2. Media representatives claim that what the government says is “news¬ 
worthy” in its own right. If, however, the government’s assertions are transmit¬ 
ted without context or evaluation, and without regard to the government’s 
possible manipulative intent, the media have set themselves up to be 
“managed.” Their objectivity is “nominal,” not substantive. 

In early October 1986, memos were leaked to the press indicating that the 
Reagan administration had carried out a deliberate campaign of disinformation 
to influence events in Libya. The mass media, which had passed along this 
material without question, expressed a great deal of righteous indignation that 
they had been misled. To compound the absurdity, five years earlier the press 
had reported a CIA-run “disinformation program designed to embarrass Qad- 
dafi and his government,” along with terrorist operations to overthrow Quad- 
dafi and perhaps assassinate him {Newsweek, Aug. 3,1981; P. Edward Haley, 
Qaddafi and the United States since 1969 [New York: Praeger, 1984], p. 272). 
But no lessons were learned. In fact, the mass media are gulled on an almost 
daily basis, but rarely have to suffer the indignity of government documents 
revealing their gullibility. With regard to Libya, the media have fallen into line 
for each propaganda ploy, from the 1981 “hit squads” through the Berlin 
discotheque bombing, swallowing each implausible claim, failing to admit 
error in retrospect, and apparently unable to learn from successive entrap¬ 
ment—which suggests willing error. See Noam Chomsky, Pirates & Emperors 
(New York: Claremont, 1986), chapter 3. As we show throughout the present 
book, a series of lies by the government, successively exposed, never seems to 
arouse skepticism in the media regarding the next government claim. 

3. For a description of the government’s strategy of deflecting attention away 
from the Nicaraguan election by the fabricated MIG story, and the media’s 
service in this government program, see chapter 3, under “The MIG Crisis 
Staged during the Nicaraguan Election Week.” 

4. James Curran and Jean Seaton, Power Without Responsibility: The Press and 
Broadcasting in Britain, 2d ed. (London: Methuen, 1985), p. 24. 

5. Quoted in ibid., p. 23. 

6. Ibid., p. 34. 


7. Ibid., pp. 38-39. 

8. Alfred McClung Lee, The Daily Newspaper in America (New York: Macmil¬ 
lan, 1937), pp. 166, 173. 

9. Earl Vance, “Freedom of the Press for Whom,” Virginia Quarterly Review 
(Summer 1945), quoted in Survival of a Free, Competitive Press: The Small 
Newspaper: Democracy's Grass Roots, Report of the Chairman, Senate Small 
Business Committee, 80th Cong., 1st session, 1947, p. 54. 

10. Note that we are speaking of media with substantial outreach—mass 
media. It has always been possible to start small-circulation journals and to 
produce mimeographed or photocopied news letters sent around to a tiny 
audience. But even small journals in the United States today typically survive 
only by virtue of contributions from wealthy financial angels. 

11. In 1987, the Times-Mirror Company, for example, owned newspapers in 
Los Angeles, Baltimore, Denver, and Hartford, Connecticut, had book pub¬ 
lishing and magazine subsidiaries, and owned cable systems and seven televi¬ 
sion stations. 

12. Ben Bagdikian, The Media Monopoly, 2nd ed. (Boston: Beacon Press, 1987), 
p. xvi. 

13. David L. Paletz and Robert M. Entman, Media . Power . Politics (New 
York: Free Press, 1981), p. 7; Stephen Hess, The Govemment/Press Connection: 
Press Officers and Their Offices (Washington: Brookings, 1984), pp. 99-100. 

14. The four major Western wire services—Associated Press, United Press 
International, Reuters, and Agence-France-Presse—account for some 80 per¬ 
cent of the international news circulating in the world today. AP is owned by 
member newspapers; UPI is privately owned; Reuters was owned mainly by 
the British media until it went public in 1984, but control was retained by the 
original owners by giving lesser voting rights to the new stockholders; Agence- 
France-Presse is heavily subsidized by the French government. As is pointed 
out by Jonathan Fenby, the wire services “exist to serve markets,” and their 
prime concern, accordingly, “is with the rich media markets of the United 
States, Western Europe, and Japan, and increasingly with the business com¬ 
munity. ...” They compete fiercely, but AP and UPI “are really U.S. enter¬ 
prises that operate on an international scale.... Without their domestic base, 
the AP and UPI could not operate as international agencies. With it, they must 
be American organizations, subject to American pressures and requirements” 
{The International News Services [New York: Schocken, 1986], pp. 7,9,73-74). 
See also Anthony Smith, The Geopolitics of Information: How Western Culture 
Dominates the World (New York: Oxford University Press, 1980), chapter 3. 

15. The fourteenth annual Roper survey, “Public Attitudes toward Television 

and Other Media in a Time of Change” (May 1985), indicates that in 1984, 64 
percent of the sample mentioned television as the place “where you usually 
get most of your news about what’s going on in the world today . . (p. 3). 

It has often been noted that the television networks themselves depend heavily 
on the prestige newspapers, wire services, and government for their choices 
of news. Their autonomy as newsmakers can be easily exaggerated. 
