(and revenue) share* The crunch is often fatal* and it helps explain the 
death of many large-circulation papers and magazines and the attrition 
in the number of newspapers* 45 

From the time of the introduction of press advertising* therefore, 
working-class and radical papers have been at a serious disadvantage. 
Their readers have tended to be of modest means, a factor that has 
always affected advertiser interest. One advertising executive stated in 
1856 that some journals are poor vehicles because “their readers are not 
purchasers* and any money thrown upon them is so much thrown 
away*” 46 The same force took a heavy toll of the post-World War II 
social-democratic press in Great Britain, with the Daily Herald, News 
Chronicle , and Sunday Citizen failing or absorbed into establishment 
systems between i960 and 1967* despite a collective average daily read¬ 
ership of 9.3 million* As James Curran points out* with 4*7 million 
readers in its last year, “the Daily Herald actually had almost double 
the readership of The Times, the Financial Times and the Guardian 
combined*” What is more, surveys showed that its readers “thought 
more highly of their paper than the regular readers of any other popular 
newspaper,” and “they also read more in their paper than the readers 
of other popular papers despite being overwhelmingly working 
class. *. *” 47 The death of the Herald, as well as of the News Chronicle 
and Sunday Citizen, was in large measure a result of progressive stran¬ 
gulation by lack of advertising support* The Herald, with 8*1 percent 
of national daily circulation, got 3*5 percent of net advertising revenue; 
the Sunday Citizen got one-tenth of the net advertising revenue of the 
Sunday Times and one-seventh that of the Observer (on a per-thou- 
sand-copies basis). Curran argues persuasively that the loss of these 
three papers was an important contribution to the declining fortunes 
of the Labor party* in the case of the Herald specifically removing a 
mass-circularion institution that provided “an alternative framework of 
analysis and understanding that contested the dominant systems of 
representation in both broadcasting and the mainstream press*” 48 A 
mass movement without any major media support* and subject to a 








16 manufacturing consent 


great deal of active press hostility, suffers a serious disability, and 
struggles against grave odds. 

The successful media today are fully attuned to the crucial impor¬ 
tance of audience “quality”: CBS proudly tells its shareholders that 
while it “continuously seeks to maximize audience delivery,” it has 
developed a new “sales tool” with which it approaches advertisers: 
“Client Audience Profile, or CAP, will help advertisers optimize the 
effectiveness of their network television schedules by evaluating audi¬ 
ence segments in proportion to usage levels of advertisers 5 products and 
services.” 49 In short, the mass media are interested in attracting audi¬ 
ences with buying power, not audiences per se; it is affluent audiences 
that spark advertiser interest today, as in the nineteenth century. The 
idea that the drive for large audiences makes the mass media “demo¬ 
cratic” thus suffers from the initial weakness that its political analogue 
is a voting system weighted by income! 

The power of advertisers over television programming stems from 
the simple fact that they buy and pay for the programs—they are the 
“patrons” who provide the media subsidy. As such, the media compete 
for their patronage, developing specialized staff to solicit advertisers 
and necessarily having to explain how their programs serve advertisers 5 
needs. The choices of these patrons greatly affect the welfare of the 
media, and the patrons become what William Evan calls “normative 
reference organizations,” 50 whose requirements and demands the 
media must accommodate if they are to succeed. 51 

For a television network, an audience gain or loss of one percentage 
point in the Nielsen ratings translates into a change in advertising 
revenue of from $80 to $100 million a year, with some variation depend¬ 
ing on measures of audience “quality, 55 The stakes in audience size and 
affluence are thus extremely large, and in a market system there is a 
strong tendency for such considerations to affect policy profoundly. 
This is partly a matter of institutional pressures to focus on the bottom 
line, partly a matter of the continuous interaction of the media or¬ 
ganization with patrons who supply the revenue dollars. As Grant 
Tinker, then head of NBC-TV, observed, television “is an advertising- 
supported medium, and to the extent that support falls out, program¬ 
ming will change.” 52 

Working-class and radical media also suffer from the political dis¬ 
crimination of advertisers. Political discrimination is structured into 
advertising allocations by the stress on people with money to buy. But 
many firms will always refuse to patronize ideological enemies and 
those whom they perceive as damaging their interests, and cases of 


A PROPAGANDA MODEL IJ 


overt discrimination add to the force of the voting system weighted by 
income. Public-television station WNET lost its corporate funding 
from Gulf + Western in 1985 after the station showed the documentary 
“Hungry for Profit/* which contains material critical of multinational 
corporate activities in the Third World, Even before the program was 
