tion* Hoge asserting that “The elections have taken on a significance 
beyond their outcome because leftist guerrillas mounted a campaign to 
disrupt them and discourage voters from going to the polls.” 67 This is 
a precise statement of the government's propaganda frame. But Hoge 
and Meislin never once cited a rebel source vowing disruption* and 
nobody else did* either. On election day no voters were killed or polling 
stations attacked* and the general level of rebel military activity was 
below average. In short* the disruption claims were falsifications of both 
plans and election-day results* but as they fit the patriotic agenda they 
were given prominence* repeated frequently* and used to establish the 
contest between the forces of good and evil. 68 At the election-day close* 
Dan Rather exclaimed* “A triumph! A million people to the polls,” 
Rather did not regard it as a triumph that the Sandinistas got 700*000 
people to the polls—a higher proportion of the population* and without 
a voting requirement. The propaganda frame of the government gave 
turnout high importance in the Salvadoran election but none in the 
Nicaraguan election* and Rather followed like a good lap dog. 

Neither Rather nor any other media analyst on or before March 30* 
1982* noted that voting was required by law in El Salvador* and not one 
mentioned the warning by the defense minister, General Guillermo 
Garcia* in the San Salvador newspapers that non voting was treaso¬ 
nous. 69 The basic parameters were entirely off the media agenda. The 
destruction of La Gronica and El Independiente and the murder of 
twenty-six journalists prior to the election were unmentioned in dis¬ 
cussing the election's quality and meaning. 70 The army and its allies had 
been killing civilians on a massive scale in El Salvador* for many months 
before (and into) March 1982, Would this not create a climate of fear 
and, in conjunction with a state of siege, somewhat encumber free 
debate and free choice? The point was rarely even hinted at in the mass 
media. 

Could candidates run freely and campaign without fear of murder? 
Could the rebels qualify and run? After all* if it was a civil war* the 
rebels were clearly the “main opposition.” Again, the mass media 
played dumb. They pretended that this exclusion was not important, 
or that it represented a willful boycott by the rebels rather than a refusal 
based on conditions unfavorable to a free election and a blatantly 





LEGITIMIZES VERSUS MEANINGLESS THIRD WORLD ELECTIONS IQ$ 


stacked deck. Neither the March 1981 death list nor the Gutierrez 
statement that the FDR would not be permitted to run were mentioned 
by the mass media in our sample. They never once suggested that the 
election plan was to create an electoral environment of extreme coer¬ 
cion and bias in which the rebels could not run, and then use this for 
the dramatic game of disruption and triumphant turnout. That the 
military agreed to the election because it couldn't lose was never sug¬ 
gested by these media. 

The role of the army was summarized by Warren Hoge in the New 
York Times: 

Is the military playing any role in the election? Members of the 
military are not allowed to vote* and the armed forces are pledged 
to protect voters from violence and to respect the outcome of the 
contest, 71 

We may note that the army’s mass killing of civilians and systematic 
destruction and demobilization of virtually all popular organizations in 
El Salvador over the preceding thirty months* which bears on what 
Secretary of State Shultz referred to as the “preliminary aspects that 
make an election mean something/ 1 is not part of the army's “role” for 
Hoge and the Times ■ Hoge repeats the Salvadoran army’s pledge, not 
only taking it at face value, but never suggesting that it (and the election 
itself) was meaningless in a terror state where the “main opposition” 
was off the ballot and only the war parties were able to field candidates. 
In the propaganda framework, the security forces of client states “pro¬ 
tect elections”/ 2 only those of enemy states interfere with the freedom 
of its citizens to vote without constraint . 

As noted earlier* observers and reporters in El Salvador all agreed 
that the populace was most eager for an end to the war, and government 
propaganda even stressed that voting was an important vehicle to that 
end—the public was urged to substitute “ballots for bullets.” But no 
peace party was on the Salvadoran ballot. And after the election was 
over, the war went on* and the death squads continued to flourish. This 
is in accordance with the hypothesis that the real purpose of the elec¬ 
tion was to placate the home population of the United States and render 
them willing to fund more war and terror. It is a poor fit to the hypothe¬ 
sis that the people of El Salvador had a free choice. An honest press 
would point up the failure of the election to substitute “ballots for 
bullets,” The mass media of the United States did not raise the issue. 

Nor did the experience of 1982 and its aftermath affect the media’s 



iio manufacturing consent 


willingness to follow the patriotic agenda once again in 1984, We will 
return to this below in a statistical comparison of the New York Times 's 
coverage of the Salvadoran and Nicaraguan elections* 

