protests and in disseminating information on the events themselves that 
countered the mainstream media’s hostile portrayal of these protests . 15 

However, although the Internet has been a valuable addition to the 
communications arsenal of dissidents and protesters, it has limitations as 
a critical tool. For one thing* those whose information needs are most 
acme are not well served by the Internet—many lack access, its databases 
are not designed to meet their needs* and the use of databases (and effec¬ 
tive use of the Internet in general) presupposes knowledge and organiza¬ 
tion. The Internet is not an instrument of mass communication for those 
lacking brand names, an already existing large audience* and/or large re¬ 
sources. Only sizable commercial organizations have been able to make 
large numbers aware of the existence of their Internet offerings. The 
privatization of the Internet’s hardware* the rapid commercialization 
and concentration of Internet portals and servers and their integration 
into non-Internet conglomerates—the AOL-Time Warner merger was a 
giant step in that direction—and the private and concentrated control 
of the new broadband technology* together threaten to limit any future 
prospects of the Internet as a democratic media vehicle. 

The past few years have witnessed a rapid penetration of the Internet 
by the leading newspapers and media conglomerates, all fearful of being 
outflanked by small pioneer users of the new technology* and willing 
(and able) to accept losses for years while testing out these new waters. 
Anxious to reduce these losses* however* and with advertisers leery of the 
value of spending in a medium characterized by excessive audience con¬ 
trol and rapid surfing* the large media entrants into the Internet have 
gravitated to making familiar compromises—more attention to selling 
goods* cutting back on news, and providing features immediately attrac¬ 
tive to audiences and advertisers. The Boston Globe (a subsidiary of the 
New York Times ) and the Washington Post are offering e-commerce goods 
and services; and Ledbetter notes that "it’s troubling that none of the 
newspaper portals feels that quality journalism is at the center of its strat¬ 
egy . , , because journalism doesn’t help you sell things .” 16 Former New 
York Times editor Max Frankel says that the more newspapers pursue 
Internet audiences, “the more will sex* sports* violence* and comedy 
appear on their menus, slighting* if not altogether ignoring* the news of 
foreign wars or welfare reform .” 17 

New technologies are mainly introduced to meet corporate needs* and 




INTRODUCTION XVII 


those of recent years have permitted media firms to shrink staff even as 
they achieve greater outputs* and they have made possible global distri¬ 
bution systems that reduce the number of media entities* The audience 
‘"interaction” facilitated by advancing interactive capabilities mainly help 
audience members to shop* but they also allow media firms to collect 
detailed information on their audiences* and thus to fine-tune program 
features and ads to individual characteristics as well as to sell by a click 
during programs* Along with reducing privacy* this should intensify com¬ 
mercialization. 

In short* the changes in politics and communication over the past 
dozen years have tended on balance to enhance the applicability of the 
propaganda model. The increase in corporate power and global reach* 
the mergers and further centralization of the media* and the decline of 
public broadcasting* have made bottom-line considerations more influ¬ 
ential both in the United States and abroad. The competition for adver¬ 
tising has become more intense and the boundaries between editorial 
and advertising departments have weakened further. Newsrooms have 
been more thoroughly incorporated into transnational corporate em¬ 
pires* with budget cuts and a further diminution of management enthusi¬ 
asm for investigative journalism that would challenge the structures of 
power. 

Over the past dozen years* sourcing and flak have also strengthened as 
mechanisms of elite influence* Media centralization and the reduction in 
the resources devoted to journalism have made the media more depend¬ 
ent than ever on the primary definers who both make the news and subsi¬ 
dize the media by providing accessible and cheap copy. They now have 
greater leverage over the media* and the public relations firms working 
for these and other powerful interests also bulk larger as media sources* 
Alex Carey, Stuart Ewen* John Stauber, and Sheldon Rampton have 
helped us see how the public relations industry has been able to utilize 
journalistic conventions to serve its—and its corporate clients 1 —ends* 18 
Studies of news sources reveal that a significant proportion of news origi¬ 
nates in public relations releases. There are* by one count, 20*000 more 
public relations agents working to doctor the news today than there are 
j ourn al ists wr i ting it. 19 

The force of anti-communist ideology has possibly weakened with the 
collapse of the Soviet Union and the virtual disappearance of socialist 
movements across the globe* but this is easily offset by the greater ideo¬ 
logical force of the belief in the '"miracle of the market” (Reagan)* The 
triumph of capitalism and the increasing power of those with an interest 
in privatization and market rule have strengthened the grip of market 



XVill INTRODUCTION 


ideology, at least among the elite, so that regardless of evidence, markets 
are assumed to be benevolent and even democratic (“market populism” 
in Thomas Frank’s phrase) and nonmarket mechanisms are suspect, al¬ 
