ganda model predicts. 

The mass media failed to call attention to the cynicism of first 
assailing Nicaragua for failing to hold an election, and then striving to 
have the election either postponed or discredited. 85 Time even cites the 
absence of “official delegations [of observers] from the major western 
democracies” (Nov. 19, 1984), as if this were evidence of something 
discreditable in the election, rather than as a reflection of U.S. power. 
There were 450-odd foreign observers in attendance at the Nicaraguan 
election, some with superb credentials, observing more freely and at 
greater length than the official U.S. observers in El Salvador and 
Guatemala, Time and the rest of the mass media paid no attention to 
them, 86 

Stephen Kinzer’s use of observers is noteworthy. In the case of 
Nicaragua, he completely ignored the unofficial observers—many ex¬ 
ceedingly well qualified to observe, as we have noted—and he even 
ignored the official Dutch government team, drawn from the center- 
right and highly apologetic about atrocities in El Salvador, which 
observed both the Salvadoran and the Nicaraguan elections and con¬ 
cluded that the elections in Nicaragua “were more open than in El 
Salvador, in the sense that more people were able to take part; that the 
opposition did not fear for their lives”; and that “the legitimation of the 
regime is thus confirmed,” 87 In Guatemala, by contrast, he cited the 
official observer report in both the 1984 and 1985 elections, despite their 
great bias and superficiality (see the report discussed in appendix r). In 
the 1984 Guatemala election, Kinzer did refer to the report of the 
unofficial Human Rights Law Group that we cited earlier, quoting their 
statement that the voting process was “procedurally correct,” but neg¬ 
lecting to note here and elsewhere their numerous statements to the 
effect that “the greater part of the population lives in permanent fear” 
(p. 4), so that “procedural correctness” has little meaning. 

With no U.S.-government-designated official observers available in 
Nicaragua, the media relied even more heavily than usual on U.S. 
government handouts. It is enlightening to compare this conduited 
propaganda of the mass media with the findings of foreign-observer 



IlS manufacturing consent 


teams on the scene in Nicaragua. For the purpose of this comparison* 
which follows* we will use two such reports. One, that of the Irish 
Inter-Party Parliamentary Delegation* is The Elections in Nicaragua, 
November 1984. The delegation was composed of four individuals* three 
from right-wing or moderate-right political parties* who spent seven¬ 
teen days in Nicaragua at the time of the election. We will also use as 
a basis of comparison of media coverage the previously cited report of 
