5. See also the preface. On the persistence of the elite consensus, including the 
media, through the period of the Iran-contra hearings and beyond, see 
Chomsky, Culture of Terrorism. 

6. Laurence R. Simon and James C. Stephens, Jr., El Salvador Land Reform 
1980-1981, Impact Audit (Boston: Oxfam America, February 1981), p. 51, citing 
Ambassador Robert White and land-reform adviser Roy Prosterman on “the 
Pol Pot left”; Raymond Bonner, Weakness and Deceit (New York: Times 
Books, 1984), p. 88, citing Ambassador White, and p. 207, citing Archbishop 
Rivera y Damas, who succeeded the assassinated Archbishop Romero. Jeane 
Kirkpatrick, “U.S. Security and Latin America,” Commentary (January 1981). 

7. Washington Post, May 21,1987. The “genocide” to which Buckley refers is 
“of the Miskito Indians,” of whom perhaps several dozen were killed by the 
Sandinistas in the context of attacks by U.S. mercenary forces, at a time when 
the U.S.-backed Guatemalan military were in the process of slaughtering tens 
of thousands of Indians, but not committing “genocide” by Buckley’s lights. 

8. Although, as we noted, with little constraint on passing along useful fabrica¬ 
tions and rumors, even relaying tales long conceded to be fabrications. 

9. W. Lance Bennett, News: The Politics of Illusion, 2d ed. (New York: Long¬ 
man, 1988), pp. 178-79. 

10. Ben Bagdikian, The Media Monopoly (Boston: Beacon Press, 1980), p. x. 

11. Edgar Chamorro, who was selected by the CIA as press spokesman for the 
contras, describes Stephen Kinzer of the New York Times as “like an errand 


1 





n v i uu * vy 


J —r J‘~ 


boy, building up those stories that fit in with Reagan’s agenda—one day it’s 
the church, the next day the Miskitos, then the private sector. In the last two 
weeks I’ve seen at least eight articles by Kinzer which say exactly what the 
White House wants. Kinzer always raises questions about Sandinista inten¬ 
tions, whether they’re truly democratic, and so on. When you analyze his 
articles you see he’s just responding to what the White House is saying” 
(Interview, Extra! [the newsletter of FAIR, Fairness & Accuracy in Report¬ 
ing], October-November 1987). FAIR is a left-liberal counterpart to the right- 
wing organization Accuracy in Media, therefore underfunded and regularly 
excluded from debate, as distinct from AIM. Its letters to editors often are 
refused publication, even when their accuracy is privately conceded; see the 
same issue for some remarkable examples. 

12. For classic accounts, see Warren Breed, “Social Control in the Newsrooms: 
A Functional Analysis,” Social Forces (May 1955)5 PP- 3 2 ^” 35 ; Gaye Tuchman, 
“Objectivity as Strategic Ritual,” American Journal of Sociology (January 1972), 
pp. 660-70. For a useful application, see Jim Sibbison, “Environmental 
Reporters: Prisoners of Gullibility,” Washington Monthly (March 1984), 
pp. 27-35. 

13. See Chomsky, in Z magazine (March 1988), for discussion of these tenden¬ 
cies. 

14. For evidence on these matters, see the specific examples discussed above 
and, for a broader picture, Chomsky, Culture of Terrorism, and sources cited. 

15. The Cable Franchise and Telecommunications Act of 1984 allows cities to 
require public-access channels, but it permits cable operators to direct these 
channels to other uses if they are not well utilized. Thus nonuse may provide 
the basis for an elimination of public access. 

16. On the differences between commercial and public television during the 
Vietnam War years, see Eric Barnouw, The Sponsor (New York: Oxford Uni¬ 
versity Press, 1978), pp. 62-65. 

17. See the programs spelled out for Great Britain in James Curran, Jake 
Ecclestone, Giles Oakley, and Alan Richardson, eds., Bending Reality: The 
State of the Media (London: Pluto Press, 1986). 


Appendix 1 

1. On Penniman’s background, and for a study of his methods as an observer, 
see “Penniman on South Vietnamese Elections: The Observer-Expert as Pro¬ 
moter-Salesman,” in Edward S. Herman and Frank Brodhead, Demonstration 
Elections: U.S.-Staged Elections in the Dominican Republic, Vietnam, and El 
Salvador (Boston: South End Press, 1984), appendix 2. 

2. In a letter of December 20, 1984, to one of his constituents who had 
complained of his gullibility as an observer, Brier asserted that his obligation 
was to report “observed election fraud, coercion of the voters, or denials of 
the right to vote. . . .” On fundamental conditions, Brier wrote: “I made and 
make no statements concerning pre-election day freedom of speech, although 
the election I just witnessed in Guatemala would lead me to believe it existed 


because of the 14 to 16 different political parties and based on press accounts, 
we have been led to believe it does not exist in Nicaragua as they prepare for 
