
Religious in Latin America 





42 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


could freely report. Almost every murder of the Latin American victims 
was carried out by official or paramilitary forces in crimes that were 
never investigated or prosecuted under law, and were on occasion even 
subject to active official cover-ups (as we describe below in connection 
with Romero and the four churchwomen). Only in the case of the four 
murdered American women, in El Salvador, was there sufficient pres¬ 
sure to force some kind of investigation and legal process. As we will 
see, this legal process was barely noted by the mass media (in contrast 
with their intense interest in the Popieluszko trial), and the press did 
not comment upon or explore the significance of the fact that there was 
a relatively serious trial in “totalitarian” Poland, while state murders 
were being carried out on a daily basis without any investigations or 
trials of the murderers in a number of countries within the U.S. sphere 
of influence called “fledgling democracies*” 


2*1.2* Coverage of the Popieluszko 

case 

Jerzy Popieluszko was an activist priest and a strong supporter of the 
Solidarity movement in Poland* In an effort to eliminate or intimidate 
him, members of the Polish secret police abducted him on October 19, 
1984* He was beaten, bound, and gagged, and eventually thrown into 
a reservoir. His body was found several days later. In the furor that 
ensued, the police directly involved in the killing were quickly identi¬ 
fied and were eventually tried and given stiff jail sentences* As we have 
seen, the level of attention given to the case in the United States was 
very great. The quality of coverage was also extremely well designed 
to score political points, and contrasts sharply with the quality of 
coverage of unworthy victims. 

2.1.2(a). Fullness and reiteration of the details of the murder and 
the damage inflicted on the victim. The coverage of the Popieluszko 
murder was notable for the fullness of the details regarding his treat¬ 
ment by the police and the condition of the recovered body* What is 
more, these details were repeated at every opportunity. The condition 
of the body was described at its recovery, at the trial when the medical 
evidence was presented, and during the testimony of the perpetrators 
of the crime* 6 At the trial, the emotional strain and guilt manifested by 
