of the State Department, assured a House committee in July 1981 that 
the Lucas Garcia government was successfully attacking the guerrillas 
“while taking care to protect innocent bystanders,” 86 The State Depart¬ 
ment’s Country Report on Human Rights for 1981 also found it impossi¬ 
ble to determine who was doing all the killing in Guatemala, and 
disappearances were attributed to the “right” and the “left,” but not 
to the government. Amnesty International, by contrast, in February 
1981, gave detailed evidence that the thousands of murders were almost 
entirely governmental in origin, including those of the death squads, 
whose victims were targeted in an annex of Guatemala’s national palace 
under the direct supervision of President Lucas Garcia, 87 

With the overthrow of Lucas Garcia, suddenly, as if by magic, the 
Reagan administration line altered, and Stephen Bosworth “could not 
emphasize strongly enough the favorable contrast between the current 
human rights situation in Guatemala and the situation last December* 
. . Melvyn Levitsky, deputy assistant secretary of state for human 
rights, told another congressional committee that “the United States 
cannot easily sustain a relationship with a government which engages 
in violence against its own people,” as with the Lucas Garcia regime. 88 

When Lucas Garcia was in power, Bosworth found it a caring regime 
that protected the innocent, and the State Department couldn’t deter¬ 
mine that the government was doing any killing. With Lucas Garcia 
ousted, the State Department discovered that he was an indiscriminate 
murderer and assumed a high moral tone about his behavior. That is, 
the State Department implicitly conceded that it was lying earlier and 
counted on the press not to point this out. Of course, the reason for the 
switch was to help make a favorable case for Lucas Garcia’s successor, 
Rios Montt Under Rios Montt there was “a dramatic decline” in 
human-rights abuses, according to State Department spokesman John 
Hughes in January 1983. Rios Montt is the one whom Reagan found to 
be getting a bum rap. But as we noted. Amnesty International found 
Rios Montt to be another top-rank murderer, who appears to have 
exceeded his predecessor in civilian massacres. 

When Rios Montt was ousted in his turn, once again the State 
Department line shifted. It was admitted that things had been terrible 
under Rios Monrt in 1982, but now there was a dramatic improvement, 
and the government was showing “increased sensitivity to human rights 
questions.” 89 It is evident that we have here a consistent pattern that 
may be formulated into a quasi-law: in the case of a terrorist state with 
which the administration wants “constructive engagement,” things are 



WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS J$ 


always OK and improving; but when that regime is ousted, its record 
