
XXIV INTRODUCTION 


were immediately denounced and featured by US. and NATO officials 
as an intolerable “massacre.” The U.S. mainstream media did the same 
and gave this reported massacre heavy and uncritical attention. 41 This 
helped create the moral basis for the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia that 
began on March 24, 1999. 

The Liquica killings of East Timorese seeking refuge in a Catholic 
church by Indonesian-organized militia forces were indisputably a “mas¬ 
sacre ” apparently involved many more victims than at Racak, and it took 
place in a territory illegally occupied by a foreign state (Indonesia). It was 
also neither a unique event nor was it connected to any warfare, as in 
Kosovo—it was a straightforward slaughter of civilians. But U.S. officials 
did not denounce this massacre—in fact, active U.S. support of the In¬ 
donesian military continued throughout this period and up to a week 
after the referendum, by which time 85 percent of the population had 
been driven from their homes and well over 6,000 civilians had been 
slaughtered. The US. mainstream media followed the official lead. For 
a twelve-month period following the date of each event, the mentions 
of Racak by the five media entities cited in the table exceeded mentions 
of Liquica by 4.1 to i, and mentions of “massacre” at the two sites was 
in a ratio of 6.7 to 1. The greater length of accounts of the Racak event 
elevates the ratio to 14 to 1 as measured by word count. Newsweek) 
which mentioned Racak and its “massacre” nine times, failed to mention 
Liquica once. 

Thus, with the cooperation of the media, the Racak killings were effec¬ 
tively used by US. officials to ready the public for war, not only by their 
intensive coverage but also by their taking the official allegations of mas¬ 
sacre at face value. In the same time frame, the media’s treatment of the 
indisputable massacre at Liquica was insufficient in volume or indigna¬ 
tion to mobilize the public, in accord with the US. policy of leaving the 
management of events in East Timor to the U.S. ally Indonesia. 


Legitimating Versus Meaningless 
Third World Elections 

In chapter 3 we show that the mainstream media have followed a govern¬ 
ment agenda in treating elections in client and disfavored states. In El 
Salvador in the 1980s, the U.S. government sponsored several elections 
to demonstrate to the U.S. public that our intervention there was ap¬ 
proved by the local population; whereas when Nicaragua held an election 
in 1984, the Reagan administration tried to discredit it to prevent legiti- 



