which had featured these matters heavily in reference to the Salvadoran 
election—where they fitted the government’s propaganda agenda— 
found them entirely unnewsworthy as regards Nicaragua, 


3.6.4. The revived sensitivity to 
coercion 

As we described earlier* the “coercion package” was off the agenda for 
the U.S. government and mass media in addressing the Salvadoran and 
Guatemalan elections. So was the element of fear engendered by mass 
murder and the absence of any rule of law in these U.S. client states. 
Coercion and fear were back on the agenda* however* for Nicaragua, 
This revival was illustrated with amazing dishonesty and hypocrisy in 
Time^ which had never mentioned fear and pressures from the govern¬ 
ment as factors possibly explaining turnout in the U.S.-sponsored elec¬ 
tions, even after the murder of 50,000 civilians. In Nicaragua* however, 
the “pugnacious” Sandinistas had “an awesome monopoly of force,” 
and gening them to “relax their grip,” which was “essential for free 
electoral competition*” was extremely dubious. Time’s Central Ameri¬ 
can correspondent George Russell even located a “Latin American 
diplomat” who says, “You can’t have democracy where there is no 
personal liberty at all” (Oct. 8 and May 14* 1984). Russell and Time had 
never found the Salvadoran government “pugnacious*” with any “awe¬ 
some monopoly of force*” or as having a “grip” that needed relaxing 
for electoral competition, and personal liberty was never mentioned as 
lacking or even pertinent to Salvadoran elections. For the Nicaraguan 
election, however* Time found that “The pressure to participate was 
high: many citizens feared they would lose precious rationing cards.” 
Further, “the government had made it clear that it considered failure 
to vote a counterrevolutionary stance.” Later, quoting Daniel Ortega* 
“All Nicaraguans who are Nicaraguans are going to vote. The only ones 
who are not going to vote are sellouts” (Nov. 19* 1984). 

As we pointed out earlier* both the Guatemalan and Salvadoran 
army warned the public that voting was required by law and that 
nonvoting was treasonous. These statements were more precisely warn- 



124 manufacturing consent 


mgs* whereas Ortega's was an insult but not a clear threat. Ortega's was 
the only such statement of its kind reported, and Time's statement that 
the government “made it clear” that nonvoting was “counterrevolu¬ 
tionary” is doubly dishonest—the statement was not clearly a warnings 
and “counterrevolutionary” is an invidious word concocted by Time, 
The official government position as expressed in the law was that Nica¬ 
raguans did not have to vote. Time suppresses this fact. It suppresses 
