on the air, the official would “have to make sure that every i was dotted 
and r crossed; but with Sterling, there were no problems,” 

Again in conformity with a propaganda model, it was of no appar¬ 
ent concern to the mass media that Sterling, Henze, and Ledeen were 
exceptionally biased sources, immune to the rules of evidence and, in 
fact, agents of disinformation. We discussed earlier Sterling’s dismis¬ 
sal of Agca’s commitment to Turkes and her handling of Agca’s gun, 
and similar cases could be cited in large number. 31 Sterling’s Terror 
Network is notable for its gullibility in accepting at face value claims 
fed her by Israeli, South African, and Argentinian secret police, and, 
most notably, the Czech Stalinist defector, Jan Sejna, 32 whose evi¬ 
dence for a Soviet terror network came from a document forged by 
the CIA to test Sejna's integrity! 33 A remarkable feature of Sterling’s 
Time of the Assassins and other writings on the Bulgarian Connection 
is her reiterated belief that the Reagan administration and CIA 
dragged their feet in pursuing the Red plot because of their interest in 
detente* 34 And despite her phenomenal sales and uncritical reception 
in the U.S. media. Sterling bemoaned the “accepted position, the so¬ 
cially indispensable position * * * if you care to move in certain circles 
and if you care to be accepted at your job professionally” in the West, 
of doubting the Bulgarian Connection, which she attributed to the 
success of the KGB in pushing a forty-page booklet on the plot by 
Soviet journalist Iona Andronov. 35 

These evidences of charlatanry did not impair Sterling's credibility 
with the U.S. mass media—in fact, the New York Times allowed her 
front-page space and a regular role as a reporter of news on the Bul¬ 
garian connection. By doing this, the Times guaranteed that editorial 
policy would control the news fit to print. This was displayed fully in 
Sterling’s front-page news story of prosecutor Albano’s report on June 
10,1984* The most important new information in that report—that on 
June 28, 1983, Agca had retracted a substantial part of his evidence 
against the Bulgarians—was omitted from Sterling’s story, although she 
coyly suggested that some undescribed points had been retracted that 
were already “corroborated.” This was seriously misleading. Agca's 
having visited Antonov's apartment and met with his family was never 
corroborated, and the details he gave on these matters had previously 
been cited by Sterling and Henze as crucial corroboration of his general 
claims. His retraction thus led to the important question of how Agca 
had learned details about Antonov’s apartment without having been 
there. This issue was never seriously addressed in the New York 
Times. 36 


160 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


Paul Henze was a longtime CIA official who had been head of the 
CIA station in Turkey and a specialist in propaganda. Former Turkish 
