15 


Member of Counci] on Foreign Relations 

20 



* Dow Jones & Co.; Washington Post; New York Times; Time* Inc,; CBS; 
Times-Mirror; Capital Cities; General Electric; Gannett; and Knight-Rid- 
der. 


publicly owned broadcasting companies* 27 These investors are also 
frequently among the largest stockholders of individual companies* For 
example* in 1980-81, the Capital Group* an investment company sys¬ 
tem, held 7*1 percent of the stock of ABC* 6*6 percent of Knight- 
Ridder* 6 percent of Time* Inc., and 2,8 percent of Westinghouse. 28 
These holdings, individually and collectively* do not convey control* 
but these large investors can make themselves heard, and their actions 
can affect the welfare of the companies and their managers, 29 If the 
managers fail to pursue actions that favor shareholder returns* institu¬ 
tional investors will be inclined to sell the stock (depressing its price), 
or to listen sympathetically to outsiders contemplating takeovers* These 



12 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


investors are a force helping press media companies toward strictly 
market (profitability) objectives. 

So is the diversification and geographic spread of the great media 
companies. Many of them have diversified out of particular media fields 
into others that seemed like growth areas. Many older newspaper-based 
media companies, fearful of the power of television and its effects on 
advertising revenue, moved as rapidly as they could into broadcasting 
and cable TV, Time, Inc,, also, made a major diversification move into 
cable TV, which now accounts for more than half its profits. Only a 
small minority of the twenty-four largest media giants remain in a single 
media sector, 30 

The large media companies have also diversified beyond the media 
field, and non-media companies have established a strong presence in 
the mass media. The most important cases of the latter are GE, owning 
RCA, which owns the NBC network, and Westinghouse, which owns 
major television-broadcasting stations, a cable network, and a radio¬ 
station network, GE and Westinghouse are both huge, diversified mul¬ 
tinational companies heavily involved in the controversial areas of 
weapons production and nuclear power. It may be recalled that from 
1965 to 1967, an attempt by International Telephone and Telegraph 
(ITT) to acquire ABC was frustrated following a huge outcry that 
focused on the dangers of allowing a great multinational corporation 
with extensive foreign investments and business activities to control a 
major media outlet, 31 The fear was that ITT control “could compro¬ 
mise the independence of ABC’s news coverage of political events in 
countries where ITT has interests/ 532 The soundness of the decision 
disallowing the acquisition seemed to have been vindicated by the later 
revelations of ITT’s political bribery and involvement in attempts to 
overthrow the government of Chile, RCA and Westinghouse, however, 
had been permitted to control media companies long before the ITT 
case, although some of the objections applicable to ITT would seem to 
apply to them as well, GE is a more powerful company than ITT, with 
an extensive international reach, deeply involved in the nuclear power 
business, and far more important than ITT in the arms industry. It is 
a highly centralized and quite secretive organization, but one with a 
vast stake in “political 55 decisions, 33 GE has contributed to the funding 
of the American Enterprise Institute, a right-wing think tank that sup¬ 
ports intellectuals who will get the business message across. With the 
acquisition of ABC, GE should be in a far better position to assure that 
sound views are given proper attention, 34 The lack of outcry over its 
takeover of RCA and NBC resulted in part from the fact that RCA 
control over NBC had already breached the gate of separateness, but 







A PROPAGANDA MODEL 1$ 


it also reflected the more pro-business and laissez-faire environment of 
the Reagan era. 

The non-media interests of most of the media giants are not large* 
and, excluding the GE and Westinghouse systems* they account for 
only a small fraction of their total revenue. Their multinational out¬ 
reach, however* is more significant. The television networks, television 
syndicators, major news magazines, and motion-picture studios all do 
extensive business abroad* and they derive a substantial fraction of their 
revenues from foreign sales and the operation of foreign affiliates. 
Reader’s Digest is printed in seventeen languages and is available in over 
160 countries. The Murdoch empire was originally based in Australia, 
and the controlling parent company is still an Australian corporation; 
its expansion in the United States is funded by profits from Australian 
and British affiliates. 35 
