


Appendix 3 


BRAESTRUP’S BIG STORY : 

Some “Freedom House Exclusives” 

In “The Tet offensive” (p. 211), we considered the example that has regularly 
been put forth to substantiate the charge that the media adopt an “adversarial 
stance” with regard to established power—coverage of the Tet offensive—and 
the Freedom House study on which this charge is based. As we saw, in this 
case too the behavior of the media conforms to the expectations of the propa¬ 
ganda model, and the major theses advanced in the Freedom House study are 
refuted even by their own evidence. What remains of their charge is the 
possibility that media coverage of the Tet offensive was technically incompe¬ 
tent, although subordinated to elite requirements. Turning to a closer exami¬ 
nation of this charge, we find that the shoe is on the other foot: when “Freedom 
House exclusives” are corrected, the performance of the media appears quite 
creditable, while the incompetence of the Freedom House study is seen to 
transcend even the level already demonstrated. That this study has been taken 
seriously, and permitted to set much of the agenda for subsequent discussion, 
is a most intriguing fact. 

According to Freedom House, television commentary and Newsweek are the 




worst offenders in this ‘‘extreme case” of journalistic incompetence, so let us 
begin by reviewing some of their sins. One example to which Braestrup reverts 
several times is Walter Cronkite’s “much publicized half-hour CBS ‘special 5 
on the war 55 on February 27 {Big Story, I, 158). According to Braestrup, 
Cronkite 5 s “assessment” here is “that U.S. troops would have to garrison the 
countryside” (I, 645). In his foreword, Leonard Sussman properly observes 
that “We do not expect the reader to accept on faith our various analyses or 
judgments,” and so “the complete texts of many of the reports discussed 55 are 
presented, primarily in volume II (I, x). Following his advice, we turn to 
volume II, where we find the complete text of Cronkite’s “special 55 (i8off.). 
There is not even a remote hint of the “assessment 55 that Braestrup attributes 
to him. 

In this important “special, 55 Braestrup claims, “In effect, Cronkite seemed 
to say, the ruins, the refugees, the disruption of pacification that came at Tet 
added up to a defeat for the allies that would force President Johnson to the 
negotiating table 55 ( 1 ,158). Cronkite says nothing of the kind. He reports that 
“there are doubts about the measure of success or setback, 55 noting accurately 
that “the experts do not agree on the objectives or on the amount of success 
