
the Freedom House thesis here faces the same “logical problem” noted 
earlier with regard to the charges concerning television: if television 1$ 
as influential as claimed* then the evidence shows that through 1967 it 
“encouraged a decisive majority of viewers to support the war,” 

To evaluate the remaining shreds of the Freedom House thesis, let 
us continue with the record of the Tet offensive, now asking whether 
the media did in fact distort it in their zealous—although utterly inef¬ 
fectual—efforts to undermine authority. 

With lavish use of firepower* U.S. forces succeeded in regaining 
control of the towns and cities. The city of Hue* which had been 
conquered from its own population by GVN troops with American 
assistance several months earlier in a desperate U.S. effort to prevent 
the growth of popular movements calling for democracy and a nego¬ 
tiated political settlement* 116 was 80 percent destroyed by bombing and 
shelling* which left 2*000 civilians buried in the “smashed ruins*” ac¬ 
cording to U.S. Air Force Undersecretary Townsend Hoopes; the ma¬ 
rines listed “Communist losses” at over 5,ooo* while Hoopes states that 
a “sizable pan” of the Communist force of 1,000 men who captured the 
city escaped, allowing a determination of who constituted the “Com¬ 
munist losses.” U.S. AID in May estimated that some 4*000 civilians 
were left dead in the ruins of the city* most of them victims of U.S. 
firepower. 119 

In the Mekong Delta* “Artillery and air strikes leveled half of My 
Tho, a city of 8o,ooo, and the provincial capital of Ben Tre [Kien Hoa 
Province* later devastated in the post-Tet terror campaign; see p. 204], 
with 140,000 inhabitants, was decimated with the justification, as an 
American colonel put it in one of the most widely quoted statements 
of the war, ‘We had to destroy the town to save it/ ” 120 The U.S. 
command conceded that “the enemy” were overwhelmingly NLF* not 
North Vietnamese; killed and captured outnumbered captured weap¬ 
ons by a factor of five, an indication of who “the enemy” really were. 
Secretary of Defense McNamara estimated NVA forces at 50,000 to 
55,000 at the end of 1967, mostly in northern regions, with some ro,ooo 
troops placed in Viet Cong combat units; the total roughly matches 
third-country forces* mostly Korean mercenaries, mobilized by the 
United States as part of its invasion of South Vietnam, and barely 10 
percent of the U.S. forces of over half a million men, even excluding 
the massive forces engaged in the attack against Vietnam and Laos from 
the sea and from U.S. sanctuaries from Thailand to the Philippines and 
Guam, employing means of destruction that dwarfed all else in Indo¬ 
china. 121 

As noted earlier, the Tet offensive not only reduced Washington to 



