grounds that the options afforded by the two parties sufficed. 103 

The U.S. corporate community has favored an immense defense 
budget’—currently more than five times the size of that of a steadily weak¬ 
ening Russia, the second biggest spender—because of the great benefits 
its members derive from military spending. These include weapons and 
other contracting business, direct and indirect subsidies in research, 104 
and the role played by military power in supporting the global economic 
expansion in which many U.S. transnational corporations are active 



Xiii INTRODUCTION 


participants and beneficiaries* Business also benefits from the market¬ 
opening actions of trade agreements and from the supportive operations 
of the WTO, the World Bank, and the IMR But these trade agreements 
and the activities of the international financial institutions have generated 
controversy and political struggle, because while their benefits to busi¬ 
ness are clear, their costs are borne heavily by workers forced to compete 
in a global job market* Furthermore, globalization and trade agreements 
strengthen the political as well as the economic power of the corporate 
community, in part because they shift decision-making authority from 
democratic polities to bankers and technocrats who more reliably serve 
the transnational corporate interest. Here also, as in the case of defense- 
versus civilian-oriented budgets, polls show a sharp dichotomy between 
corporate and public preferences, with the latter generally hostile to the 
agreements and institutional arrangements favored by business. 105 

The propaganda model fits well the media’s treatment of this range 
of issues. Consider, for example, their coverage of the passage of the 
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the subsequent 
Mexican financial crisis and meltdown of 1994-95. Polls taken before 
its enactment consistently showed substantial majorities opposed to 
NAFTA—and later to the bailout of investors in Mexican securities—but 
the elite in favor* Media editorials, news coverage, and selection of 
“experts” in opinion columns were heavily skewed toward the elite pref¬ 
erence; their judgment was that the benefits of NAFTA were obvious, 
were agreed to by all qualified authorities, and that only demagogues and 
“special interests” were opposed* 106 The “special interests” who might be 
the “losers” included women, minorities, and a majority of the work¬ 
force. 107 The media dealt with the awkward fact that polls showed steady 
majority opposition to the agreement mainly by ignoring it, but occasion¬ 
ally they suggested that the public was uninformed and didn’t recognize 
its own true interests. 108 The effort of labor to influence the outcome of 
the NAFTA debates was sharply attacked in both the New York Times and 
the Washington Post > with no comparable criticism of corporate or govern¬ 
mental (U*S* and Mexican) lobbying and propaganda. And while labor 
was attacked for its alleged position on these issues, the press refused to 
