criticism: the media's pervasive, docile, and unthinking acceptance of 
a set of patriotic assumptions at such a level as to make further com¬ 
mentary of secondary significance, at best* 


5*3. THE EARLY STAGES: A 
CLOSER LOOK 

The “first Indochina war,” fought by the French and their client forces 
and largely supplied by the United States, came to an end with the 
Geneva Accords of 1954, which established a partition at the 17th 
parallel pending reunification through elections within two years* The 
United States pledged not to obstruct these arrangements* 

The Geneva settlement was quickly undermined by the United 
States and its client regime because it was taken for granted on all sides 
that elections would lead to a unified Vietnam under Viet Minh rule. 
“American intelligence sources were unanimous that Diem [the U.S.- 
imposed client] would lose any national election,” George Kahin con¬ 
cludes from a close inspection of the available record. The Viet Minh 
had agreed to the Geneva decision for regroupment of its forces well 
to the north of territories it controlled on the basis of “the assurance 
that the struggle for the control of Vietnam would be transferred from 
the military to the political level, a realm in which the Vietminh leaders 
knew their superiority over the French and their Vietnamese collabora¬ 
tors was even greater than it was militarily. * . . For the Vietminh, this 
was the heart of the Geneva Agreements.” 49 

The secret U.S. response to the perceived disaster of Geneva was a 
plan to resort to military action (including attacks on China if deemed 
necessary) in the event of “local Communist subversion or rebellion not 
constituting armed attack,” in explicit violation of the UN Charter, 
which limits the use of force to self-defense in the event of “armed 
attack” until the UN Security Council is able to respond. This crucial 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (i): VIETNAM 187 


decision* misrepresented beyond recognition in the Pentagon Papers 
history and generally ignored, also recommended operations against 
China, “covert operations on a large and effective scale* 5 throughout 
Indochina (including North Vietnam), remilitarization of Japan, devel¬ 
opment of Thailand “as the focal point for LLS. covert and psychologi¬ 
cal operations in Southeast Asia/ 5 etc. 50 Defense Secretary Robert 
McNamara observed in a memorandum for President Johnson that 
“Only the U.S. presence after 1954 held the south together . , . and 
enabled Diem to refuse to go through with the 1954 provision calling 
for nationwide free elections in 1956. * 551 

Surveying the media during this period, Howard Elterman observes 
that “during a six-month period in 1955 and 1956, there was virtually 
no news coverage” about the U.S- policy of undermining the Geneva 
Accords in the New York Times and the three newsweeklies. Commu¬ 
nist charges to this effect were occasionally mentioned on back pages 
but dismissed as propaganda—accurate propaganda, in fact. When the 
evasion of elections was conceded, it was justified on the basis of 
Communist terror and regimentation. The Times (June 2, 1956) de¬ 
scribed Vietnam as a country “divided into the Communist regime in 
the north and a democratic government in the south* 5 —namely, the 
murderous and corrupt Diem dictatorship. Newsweek denounced the 
“wide infiltration in South Vietnam 5 * in support of the “implacable 
purpose” of the Viet Minh, while ILS * News & World Report con¬ 
demned Ho Chi Minh for “plotting new Red aggression in Southeast 
Asia.” 52 

More generally, through 1956 “the press insured that the reading 
public would view the war as a struggle between Communism and the 
Free World,” Susan Welch observes on the basis of her survey of 
several leading journals. Ho Chi Minh and the Viet Minh were pre¬ 
sented as “merely agents of Moscow and Peking whose primary means 
of gaining support was through terror and force (although occasional 
mention was made of their nationalist appeal),” while France was “a 
gallant ally . . . fighting alongside the United States to preserve liberty 
and justice in Asia,” a cause carried on by the United States alone after 
Geneva, State doctrine was “never challenged* 5 by editors or colum¬ 
nists. The liberal press showed particular enthusiasm for the cause, and 
“News stories also reinforced the preconceptions of the Administra¬ 
tion,* 5 because “the press relied almost completely on Administration 
sources for information which was reported.* 5 Although coverage of 
Indochina was limited, apart from a peak in 1954, and faded still further 
afterwards, “the terms of the future debate over U.S. policy were being 
hardened into usage by the press.” 53 



m MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


With peaceful settlement successfully deterred, the United States 
and its client regime turned to the task of internal repression, killing 
tens of thousands and imprisoning tens of thousands more- 54 Diem 
supporter and adviser Joseph Buttinger describes “massive expedi¬ 
tions” in 1956 that destroyed villages, with hundreds or thousands of 
peasants killed and tens of thousands arrested by soldiers in regions 
“controlled by the Communists without the slightest use of force,” facts 
that “were kept secret from the American people”—and still are* 55 
The main target of the repression was the anti-French resistance, the 
Viet Minh, which was virtually decimated by the late 1950s. The rea¬ 
