
68 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


both the Salvadoran cover-up and the facts of the case. The U.S. mass 
media, while briefly noting the Salvadoran stonewalling, failed to call 
attention to the equally important lies and suppressions of their own 
government As we have pointed out, both the Carter and Reagan 
administrations put protection of its client above the quest for justice 
for four U.S. citizens murdered by agents of that government. The U.S. 
government’s stonewalling to protect its client took many forms. One 
was an active collaboration in the Salvadoran cover-up. Former Na¬ 
tional Guard sergeant Dagoberto Martinez was allowed to emigrate to 
the United States in December 1980, and although a subsequent inter¬ 
view by the FBI indicated that Martinez admitted knowledge of the 
perpetrators of the crime and a failure to report that information—in 
violation of Salvadoran law—no action was taken against him. U.S. 
officials also reiterated that there was no reason to believe that higher- 
level officials knew about the crime or participated in it, when they had 
clear knowledge of a cover-up and a refusal to investigate. 67 The State 
Department also regularly lied about the thoroughness of the investiga¬ 
tion. Ambassador Hinton stated in public that national guardsman 
Perez Nieto “was thoroughly interrogated and repeatedly denied that 
anyone superior to him had ordered him to watch the women.” A State 
Department cable, however, describes Nieto’s testimony as “incom¬ 
plete, evasive, and uncooperative.” 68 

A second form of official U.S. participation in the cover-up was a 
refusal to make public information on the Salvadoran investigation and 
evidence uncovered by the United States itself. The Rogers report was 
released belatedly, in a version that edited out the original report’s 
statement about the sad state of the Salvadoran system of justice. In 
response to a growing chorus of criticism of the delays, Judge Harold 
R. Tyler was appointed by the U.S. government to carry out a further 
investigation. His report was kept under wraps for a long time, again 
apparently because it had some serious criticism of the Salvadoran 
judicial process that would have interfered with Reagan administration 
plans to claim progress every time such certification was required. 69 
The families of the victims and their attorneys regularly found the U.S. 
government unwilling to release information on the case. The argument 
given was that the information was sensitive, and that releasing it would 
interfere with the legal process in El Salvador. As the Salvadoran 
process was a sick joke, moving only in response to U.S. threats, the 
official rationale was transparently fraudulent. Furthermore, Duarte 
was regularly making statements that the arrested guardsmen were 
surely guilty, and that nobody higher than them was involved, which 



70 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


v&nez stated that the guardsmen knew that “If they don’t name Casa¬ 
nova, they will get out of jail as soon as it is feasible/’ 70 This testimony 
was not referred to in the trial context—the media played dumb. 

Like the Salvadoran elections of 1982 and 1984, this trial was 
thoroughly American in staging and motivation. As Ana Carrigan put 
it: 

Security in the courtroom was in the hands of a special Judicial 
Protection Unit, formed and trained in Glencoe, Alabama; the 
jurors were driven to the courtroom in the morning and returned 
to their homes after the verdict in bullet-proof American embassy 
vehicles; meals and camp beds were provided by the embassy so 
that if necessary the jurors and the staff of the court could sleep 
overnight within the protection of the guarded courthouse; and 
when the electricity failed, just as the prosecution began to make 
its presentation, light was restored by means of hurricane lamps 
delivered by embassy staff. 71 

The stakes were U.S. dollars. Congress had frozen $194 million pend¬ 
ing the favorable outcome of the case. Within twenty-four hours of the 
decision, the State Department, announcing that justice had been done, 
released the money to the charge of Minister of Defense Vides Casa¬ 
nova, who had been head of the National Guard on December 4,1980, 
when the murders took place, whose first cousin, according to Colonel 
Santivanez, had given the direct order to kill, and who had so effectively 
protected his cousin and stalled the prosecution of underlings for three- 
and-a-half years. 

In conformity with the predictions of a propaganda model, the mass 
media failed entirely to capture the quality of this scene—the American 
omnipresence, the courtroom security, the failure of the defense to 
press the responsibility of the higher authorities, the role of Vides 
Casanova, the literal money transaction for justice in this single case y 
which dragged on for three-and-a-half years. Newsweek found the re¬ 
sult a “remarkable achievement,” in an article entitled “A Defeat for 
a Death Squad” (June 4,1984), despite the fact that it was the National 
Guard that killed the women. The article does stress the difficulties in 
bringing and winning the case, and the possibility of a cover-up of 
higher-level personnel, but it does not use this information to point up 
the nature of the system being supported by the United States. It also 
closes out the discussion with reference to the Tyler report discounting 
high-level involvement, without quoting the report’s acknowledgment 
of “some evidence supporting the involvement of higher-ups” or men- 


WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS Jl 

