

IKTRODUGTION XXX111 


Rain was bee feces, not chemicals. 72 Nevertheless, this campaign re¬ 
ceived vastly more publicity than the real and large-scale chemical war¬ 
fare carried out by the United States in Indochina. The Wall Street 
Journal , which had heavily featured Yellow Rain and expressed the great¬ 
est indignation at this display of Communist evil, never mentioned the 
US. employment of chemicals in that area during its Yellow Rain cam¬ 
paign. The Journal s publisher Peter Kann, eventually wrote that the 
Vietnam war record had clarified "who were the good guys and who were 
the bad guys/’ definitively shown by “the poisoned fields of Laos' 7 (his 
euphemism for Yellow Rain). 73 In short, Kann places the massive real- 
world use of chemical warfare by the United States in Orwell's black hole 
and demonstrates Communist evil by putting forward the discredited 
claim of Yellow Rain that his paper has still not admitted to be fraudu¬ 
lent. 

But the more important facts are these: that with the help of the 
media, the Soviet Union was effectively linked to the use of this ugly 
weapon, based on false evidence; while by treating the real and large- 
scale use of chemical weapons in Indochina by the United States in very 
low key up to this very day, the media have helped convey the impression 
that this country is a moral force on this issue and opposes use of this ter¬ 
rible weaponry. U.S. leaders have opposed the use of chemical warfare— 
by enemy states—but it is a different matter when they choose to use 
such weaponry themselves, or when a client state does the same. 74 


Rewriting Vietnam War History 

There have been thousands of books written on the Vietnam War , 75 and 
that war has been a brooding omnipresence in the US. culture since its 
end in 1975* For the dominant elite the war represents an era in which 
resistance to national policy and the associated rise of formerly apathetic 
sectors of society caused a “crisis of democracy” Those unruly sectors 
and the dissidents are seen as having damaged the cultural and political 
framework and imposed unreasonable impediments to the use of force, 
the latter referred to as the “Vietnam syndrome ” Within the unruly sec¬ 
tors and among the dissidents, of course, the “Sixties” are viewed as an 
era of liberation, of cultural and moral advance, and a temporary surge of 
dem oc r atizati on. 

The propaganda model would lead us to expect mainstream media 
retrospectives on the war to reflect elite perspectives, portraying the 
1960s as a dark age and the U.S, role in the war as, at worst, a case of 
good intentions gone awry. Focusing here on their treatment of the war 



xxx JV introduction 


over the past decade, we see that the media have mainly repeated and 
elaborated several apologetic themes already entrenched by the end of 
the war. 

One theme has been that the U.S. intervention was justified by the fact 
of “communism on the march’ 1 (editorial, Washington Post, April 30, 
2000), It was argued from the beginning that the Communist advance in 
Vietnam was part of a global communist conspiracy, a position main¬ 
tained in the face of the split and hostility between China and the Soviet 
Union, tension between China and North Vietnam, and the absence of 
any evidence that North Vietnam was anybody's tool. In his book In Ret¬ 
rospect / 7 former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara admits that he 
and his colleagues made a serious error on this point. But neither he nor 
the other establishment figures who have used this argument have ever 
questioned the U.S, right to intervene by force to stop the “march of 
communism" in a country where the Communists had Jed a nationalist 
revolution, were recognized by all official and nonofficia] authorities to 
command the support of a Large majority of the population, and where 
their defeat would require open aggression, mass killing, and the virtual 
destruction of a distant society. 

Closely related was the theme that we were protecting “South Viet¬ 
nam" and the “South Vietnamese," who “let the Americans take over the 
fighting” (editorial, Washington Post , April 30, T995). A subtheme of this 
line is that we “let down" the South Vietnamese. But as noted earlier. 
South Vietnam as a political entity was a U.S. concoction and the U.S, 
war managers recognized that most of the southern population sup¬ 
ported the side the United States was fighting. This explains why the 
main thrust of U.S. violence was directed to the South, where napalm, 
B-52 bombing raids, chemical warfare, the institutionalized killing of 
civilians, and a scorched-earth policy were used to destroy the base of 
the popular movement. 73 We also noted earlier that this ferocious U.S, 
assault on the South—which contradicted the claim that we were pro¬ 
tecting South Vietnamese—-remains invisible in the U.S. media. 

Another important theme in the mainstream media for many years has 
been the notion that The United States was the victim in the Vietnam war, 
the Vietnamese the cruel villains. This remarkable inversion of reality has 
been accomplished by two processes: first, by a massive suppression of 
evidence on the consequences of the war for the Vietnamese; and second, 
by demonizing the victims, based in large measure on “the national beat¬ 
ification of POWs [prisoners of war] and the myth of POWs as martyrs 
still being tortured by Vietnam."™ 

The only Vietnamese allowed modest attention in the media have been 
