the media to exercise “the power to root about in our national life, 
exposing what they deem right for exposure,” without regard to exter¬ 
nal pressures or the dictates of authority (Lewis). It is this period, then, 
that poses a challenge to a propaganda model, and we have therefore 
taken it as the focus of our inquiry. Many of the examples we discuss 
are from the past decade, when the liberal media were allegedly in 
confrontation with a “conservative” administration that they would 



CONCLUSIONS 299 


have been expected to oppose vigorously* In a further effort to ensure 
that we are not selecting exceptional cases* we have cast the net widely* 
We have selected for close examination cases that pose the most severe 
challenge to our model* namely* those put forth by critics as demon¬ 
strating that the media have gone too far in their exuberant indepen¬ 
dence and challenge to authority* so far that they must be curbed if 
democracy is to survive: for example, the coverage of the Tet offensive* 
the prime illustration of alleged excesses of the media offered in the 
1970s and 1980s* Even these cases demonstrate the subordination of the 
media to the requirements of the state propaganda system* At the peak 
of alleged media independence* as the Vietnam War entered its final 
period and the media were threatening Nixon’s presidency* the subor¬ 
dination to these demands never flagged* as illustrated by the media 
coverage of the Paris peace treaty of 1973* one of the most flagrant 
examples of media misrepresentation based on an uncritical reiteration 
of official claims and adherence to the political agenda of the state* 

We may illustrate the point in yet another case* chosen by those who 
defend the standard version of the media as their strongest ground: the 
Watergate affair. To many critics of the media* this incident illustrates 
their irresponsible excesses; to those who proudly defend the media, it 
illustrates their independence of higher authority and commitment to 
the values of professional journalism. What* then* are the lessons of 
Watergate? 

The major scandal of Watergate as portrayed in the mainstream 
press was that the Nixon administration sent a collection of petty 
criminals to break into the Democratic party headquarters* for reasons 
that remain obscure. The Democratic party represents powerful do¬ 
mestic interests* solidly based in the business community, Nixon’s ac¬ 
tions were therefore a scandal. The Socialist Workers party, a legal 
political party* represents no powerful interests. Therefore, there was 
no scandal when it was revealed, just as passions over Watergate 
reached their zenith* that the FBI had been disrupting its activities by 
illegal break-ins and other measures for a decade, a violation of demo¬ 
cratic principle far more extensive and serious than anything charged 
during the Watergate hearings* What is more* these actions of the 
national political police were only one element of government programs 
extending over many administrations to deter independent political 
action* stir up violence in the ghettos* and undermine the popular 
movements that were beginning to engage sectors of the generally 
marginalized public in the arena of decision-making. 2 These coven and 
illegal programs were revealed in court cases and elsewhere during the 
Watergate period, but they never entered the congressional proceedings 




300 manufacturing consent 


and received only limited media attention. Even the complicity of the 
FBI in the police assassination of a Black Panther organizer in Chicago 
was not a scandal* in marked contrast to Nixon’s “enemies list,” which 
identified powerful people who were denigrated in private but suffered 
no consequences. As we have noted, the U.S. role in initiating and 
carrying out the first phase of "the decade of the genocide” in Cam¬ 
bodia entered the Watergate proceedings only marginally: not because 
hundreds of thousands of Cambodians were slaughtered in the course 
of a major war crime, but because Congress was not properly notified, 
so that its privileges were infringed, and even this was considered too 
slight an infraction to enter the final charges. What was true of Con¬ 
gress was also true of the media and their investigative reporting that 
"helped force a President from office” (Lewis) in what is held to be a 
most remarkable display of media independence, or arrogance, depend¬ 
ing on one’s point of view. 

History has been kind enough to contrive for us a “controlled experi¬ 
ment” to determine just what was at stake during the Watergate period, 
when the confrontational stance of the media reached its peak. The 
answer is clear and precise: powerful groups are capable of defending 
themselves, not surprisingly; and by media standards, it is a scandal 
when their position and rights are threatened. By contrast, as long as 
illegalities and violations of democratic substance are confined to mar¬ 
ginal groups or distant victims of U.S. military attack, or result in a 
diffused cost imposed on the general population, media opposition is 
muted or absent altogether. 3 This is why Nixon could go so far, lulled 
into a false sense of security precisely because the watchdog only 
barked when he began to threaten the privileged. 

Exactly the same lessons were taught by the Iran-contra scandals 
and the media reaction to them. 4 It was a scandal when the Reagan 
administration was found to have violated congressional prerogatives 
during the Iran-contra affair, but not when it dismissed with contempt 
the judgment of the International Court of Justice that the United 
States was engaged in the “unlawful use of force” and violation of 
treaties—that is, violation of the supreme law of the land and custom¬ 
