Who gained and who lost from the plot? Were there any possible Western 
motives that might bear on the case? Tagliabue follows the SHK line in failing 
to raise these questions. But once Agca was imprisoned in Italy, cold warriors 
of the West had much to gain and little to lose by manipulating Agca to pin 
the assassination attempt on the East. Tagliabue mentions that the charges of 
a Bulgarian Connection surfaced “at the nadir” of U.S.-Soviet relations. While 
he notes how this added to the credibility of the plot in the West, he never 


hints at the possibility that its serviceability to the new Cold War might explain 
Agca’s belated confession. 


Agca’s Stay in Bulgaria 

This has always been critical in the Sterling -Times scenarios, and Tagliabue 
drags it in. It is given further emphasis with the heading “Spent 2 Months in 
Bulgaria.” Tagliabue does not mention that Agca stopped in eleven other 
countries. He fails to note here, and the Times suppressed throughout, Catli’s 
testimony in Rome that the Gray Wolves liked to go through Bulgaria to reach 
Western Europe because the heavy Turkish traffic made it easy to hide. Taglia¬ 
bue fails to mention that bringing Agca for a long stay in Sofia would have been 
a violation of the rule of plausible deniability. Even more so would be using 
Bulgarians to help Agca in Rome. Tagliabue does not discuss the question of 
plausible deniability. He also fails to note that if Agca had stayed in Sofia for 
a while, this would allow a prima facie case to be made by a Western propagan¬ 
dist that the East was behind the shooting, and could provide the basic materi¬ 
als for working Agca over for the desired confession. 


Bulgarian Involvement in Turkey 

Tagliabue asserts that the Bulgarians were “purportedly” supporting both the 
extreme left and right in Turkey “to promote instability” in a conflict “that 
pitted violent leftist terrorists against their counterparts on the right.” This is 
a Sterling myth, with Tagliabue hiding behind “purportedly” to allow him to 
pass off myth as purported evidence. The equating of left and right in the 
Turkish violence of the 1970s is false: the great majority of violent attacks were 
launched by the Gray Wolves, under the protection of the police and military. 
Tagliabue also fails to discuss the fact that the extreme right actually par¬ 
ticipated in the government in 1977 and had extensive links to the army and 
intelligence services. The claim of Bulgarian support for both the right and left 
has never been supported by evidence. Tagliabue never mentions that the 
United States had more than “purported” links with the Turkish army, the 
secret services, and the Fascist Nationalist Action party, and that the terrorist 
events of the late 1970s eventually served U.S. interests well. 


Key Question: How Agca Knew So 

Much 

The “key question” for Tagliabue is “how Agca knew what he knew and when 
he knew it.” This is an important issue, but there are others that he might have 


raised if he had worked outside the SHK format. Why did it take Agca so long 
to name Bulgarians? Was he subject to any coercion or offered any positive 
inducements to make him talk. Why did he have to make major retractions? 
Is it not suspicious that when Agca finally talked, he said just what his inter¬ 
rogators wanted him to say? How are we to evaluate a judicial process where 
the witness (Agca) was in regular contact with outside sources of information 
and where he could lie and retract evidence without penalty? 


“Even the Attorneys for the 
Bulgarians...,” 

In assessing how Agca knew so much, Tagliabue allocates only one paragraph 
to the possibility that Agca was coached. On the other hand, he goes to great 
pains to stress that Agca knew an awful lot—telephone numbers, personal 
habits, nicknames. Tagliabue gives as the “simplest explanation” of Agca’s 
knowledge that he had access to books, newspapers, magazines, and other 
materials from the outside. Interestingly, he fails to mention the numerous 
prison contacts between Agca and secret service, Mafia, and Vatican agents 
and emissaries. Agca even wrote a letter to the Vatican complaining of the 
pressure from its representative in prison (also linked to the Mafia), a fact long 
blacked out by the Times. These visits would point to the ease with which Agca 
could have been fed information while in prison. Tagliabue will not admit facts 
that get into this dangerous territory. 

A major question is how Agca knew details about Antonov’s apartment when 
he later admitted to Martella that he had never been there . The Bulgarians and 
Antonov’s defense went to great pains to prove that the information Agca 
provided about Antonov’s apartment had never been divulged in the media 
before Agca enumerated the details. This implied coaching, as did a mistake 
in identification where Agca described a characteristic of Antonov’s apartment 
that fitted other apartments in the building, but not Antonov’s. Tagliabue says 
that “Even the attorneys for the Bulgarians acknowledge” that Agca named 
things not available through reading the papers, as if they were conceding a 
point, not making a devastating case for coaching. Newspaper work couldn’t 
be more dishonest than this. 




reports, had mentioned Mafia official Giovanni Pandico’s statement in Italy 
outlining a scenario of coaching at which he claimed to be present, but Taglia¬ 
bue doesn’t even cite this or any other documents or facts that lend support 
to the coaching hypothesis. He sticks to the ingredients that fit the SHK 
