
Along with the minuscule attention to the murder of Guatemalan 
priests, the details of the killings were brief, and no sense of outrage 
was generated or sustained. 91 The few lengthier articles never discuss 
the role of the 1954 coup and the long training and supply relationship 
of the United States to the Guatemalan police and army; 92 rather, they 
almost invariably put the killings in the format of a civil war with 
unexplained atrocities of extremists of the right and left (see “Arch¬ 
bishop Oscar Romero, 5 * p, 48}. An AP dispatch in the New York Times 
of May 16,1981, is entitled “Four Guatemalans Slain in Leftist-Rightist 
Rivalry/ 5 The article, which reports on the murder of one of our 
twenty-three priests, the Reverend Carlos Galvez Galindo, says: “The 
attacks appeared to be related to the long struggle for power between 
leftists and rightists/ 5 A UPI dispatch in the Times of July 29, 1981, 
reporting on the murder of Rev, Stanley Rother, also relates the attack 
to “right-wing extremists 55 —not the Guatemalan government. 

Time has Rother and his Guatemalan villagers “caught in the middle 
of an undeclared civil war. . . .” 93 Time never explains the roots of the 
civil war, nor the crucial role of the United States in refusing to allow 
peaceful social change and installing the institutions of permanent 
counterrevolution. Time does, in most unusual fashion, point out that 
the government was responsible for the “overwhelming majority’ 5 of the 
killings, and even more exceptionally, it cites Amnesty InternationaPs 
evidence that the paramilitary death squads are an arm of the govern¬ 
ment. But the article fails to give illustrations of the scope and quality 
of the murders, and retreats, as noted, to the civil-war rationale. Even 
more compromising is its framing of the U.S. policy debate. According 
to Time ? “Yet Guatemala confronts the Reagan administration with one 
of its toughest foreign policy challenges: on one hand, the country is 
viewed as a victim of Cuban-sponsored insurgency, needing U.S. sup¬ 
port; on the other, the government obviously violates human rights/* 
The dichotomy offered by Time is a bit uneven: the Cuban sponsorship 
is a Cold War ploy for which no evidence has ever been given, but it 
provides a convenient propaganda framework that is regularly deployed 
by the State Department to divert attention from its support of mass 
murderers. Time thus elevates it to equality with a real and extremely 
serious charge—and without an honest citation even to a political hack. 
The “on the other hand 5 * is, despite the “obviously, 5 * a gross understate¬ 
ment. The Reagan administration chose to support and provide regular 
apologetics for a genocidal government that was using a policy of 
massacre to destroy a purely indigenous revolt. The “challenge” for the 



WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS JJ 


Reagan administration—quite different from that portrayed by Time — 
was how to sell the support of mass murder. Time did its little bit by 
