the 15-member delegation sent by the Latin American Studies Associa¬ 
tion (LASA)* half of whom had had “substantial field experience” in 
Nicaragua itself. This delegation spent eight days in Nicaragua before 
the election* traveled in a rented bus* determined their own itinerary, 
and “spoke with anyone who we chose to approach (as well as numer¬ 
ous people who spontaneously approached us).” 88 


3*6*1. Tone of negativism and 
apathy 

Time magazine hardly attempts to hide the fact that it takes its cues 
from Washington. It quotes John Hughes, then a public-relations man 
for the State Department (and previously, and subsequently, a colum¬ 
nist for the Christian Science Monitor): “It was not a very good election. 
, . . It was just a piece of theatre for the Sandinistas.” 89 Time follows 
this cue with a series of denigrating strokes: “The Sandinistas win* as 
expected. . . . The Nicaraguan election mood was one of indifference. 
... The outcome was never in doubt. -. . Something of an anticlimax” 
(all in the issue of November 19, 1984). In an earlier article (October 
29), Time indulged in the same negative refrain: “A campaign without 
suspense*” voters “too apathetic to go to the polls at all” (this was a 
forecast dredged up well before the election). In both articles, “fear” 
was also featured heavily. In the Salvadoran election, Time's tone was 
different: “There was no denying the remarkable sense of occasion” 
(i.e.* the Reagan administration had a big public-relations investment 
in the election); “hundreds of thousands , , . braved the threats, and 
sometimes the bullets, of the Marxist-led [FMLN] to join long serpen¬ 
tine polling lines for the country's much awaited presidential elections” 
(Apr. 9, 1984). 90 In Guatemala too, “Some 1.8 million voters braved 
four-hour polling lines* tropical rainstorms and a bewildering array of 
political choices to cast ballots in their country's most open and fraud- 
free elections in more than a decade” (July 16* 1984). There is never 
apathy or fear of government force in Time's renditions of demonstra¬ 
tion elections. 


legitimizing versus meaningless third world elections 119 


Stephen Kinzer* in the Times, also took a far less kindly view of the 
election in Nicaragua than of those in Guatemala, giving enormous 
attention to election opponents like the ILS. candidate Arturo Cruz 
(whereas in Guatemala he almost completely ignored the small parties* 
union protesters* rebels* and human-rights groups)* and finding more 
people voting out of fear than he did in Guatemala, a remarkable 
discovery given the circumstances in the two countries, 91 He focuses 
steadily on the Sandimstas 5 efforts to get out the vote* the fact that the 
election result is a foregone conclusion, claims of the breaking up of 
election rallies, and allegations of unfairness and withdrawals by the 
opposition. As with Time, the voters are “philosophical,” “enthusiasm 
for the election was not universal,” and “there was little visible enthusi¬ 
asm,” Kinzer did not compare the electoral modalities* range of op¬ 
tions* or other basic conditions in Nicaragua and Guatemala (or El 
Salvador), In short, he discussed different questions in his news report¬ 
ing on the elections in Nicaragua and Guatemala* adhering closely to 
the propaganda frame, 92 

On the alleged negativism and apathy, both the Irish and LASA 
delegations noted that voting was not required in Nicaragua and was 
entirely secret. Therefore* as the Irish delegation pointed out, the low 
rate of abstention is more meaningful and “invalidates predictions that 
large sectors of the population were opposed to the election. Further¬ 
more, the percentage of spoiled votes (7.4 percent) is comparable to any 
European election in a country with a highly literate population” (p, 
7), They also note that 

Speaking with one old man, awaiting his turn to vote in a rural 
polling station* one member of the delegation inquired: “What 
difference do you see between this and any other election in which 
you voted?” He replied: “Everything.” “In what way?” He simply 
shrugged: “Everything is different.” 

The U.S. media never located anybody like this old man. The Irish 
delegation also pointed out that 

Some observers from other countries suggested that the people 
did not appear enthusiastic as they went to the polls. This is not 
surprising as people stood in long queues waiting patiently their 
turn to go behind the curtain to mark their ballot paper. One 
member of the delegation who had the opportunity to observe 
voters in the American election just two days later* noted no 
greater enthusiasm for standing in queues there! 




120 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


It is our belief that the invariable enthusiasm and optimism found by 
the U*S. mass media in client-state elections* and the apathy and nega¬ 
tivism found in elections in states disfavored by the U*S* administra¬ 
tion, has nothing to do with electoral realities and must be explained 
entirely by an imposed propaganda agenda and the filtering out of 
contrary opinion and information* 


3.6*2* Ignoring the superior 
quality of the Nicaraguan 
