films and photographs of peaceful English villages or Hawaiian towns ap¬ 
peared on the days that Coventry and Pearl Harbor were bombed, to balance 
the picture. 

Braestrup seeks the causes for the “exoneration of the Vietcong” for “killing 
noncombatants or causing the exodus of refugees” (I, 234), overlooking the 
fact that before seeking the cause of x it is necessary to show that x is true. 
In this case, it is not. The accounts he cites regularly blame the Viet Cong for 
civilian suffering and emphasize Viet Cong atrocities. In fact, he himself points 
out that “both Time and Newsweek put the onus on the Vietcong” in Saigon 
( 1 ,246)—as elsewhere. Newsweek titled an article “The VC’s Week of Terror 
(Feb. 12) and described VC terror squads executing civilians in Saigon ( 1 , 49 °)- 
Typically, the media blamed the Viet Cong for having “brought bullets and 
bombs into the very midst of heavily populated areas, causing indiscriminate 
slaughter of civilians caught in the cross fire and making homeless twice oyer 
the refugees who had fled to the cities for safety...” (Time, [ 1 ,246]), adopting 
the position of U.S. government propaganda that the enemy is to blame if the 
United States kills and destroys, and failing to add that the refugees had fled 


to the cities for safety from massive U.S. violence and that such refugee 
generation was explicit policy. 10 In the New York Times, Charles Mohr wrote 
that “In one sense the Vietcong have been responsible for civilian deaths by 
launching the urban attacks,” citing American officials who are “sure that the 
population will be bitter about the guerrillas because of their ‘callous disregard 
for human life’ ” (I, 243). Meanwhile, AP, the Washington Post, NBC, and 
others reported Viet Cong causing destruction, using civilians as shields, pre¬ 
venting civilians from fleeing attack, murdering civilians, etc., often on the 
basis of flimsy evidence that would elicit much Freedom House derision if used 
to support accounts of American atrocities. In a typical misrepresentation, 
Braestrup claims that NBC-TV “attributed Saigon’s losses solely to an allied 
military decision to ‘kill or maim some of the people’ to protect the rest” (our 
emphasis), citing Howard Tuckner’s statement that there was a decision “that 
in order to protect most of the . . . people, they had to kill or maim some of 
the people”—a statement that is quite different from the paraphrase and is 
noteworthy only for its standard reference to “protecting” the victims (1,249). 

In general, far from “exonerating the Vietcong,” the media bent over back¬ 
wards to blame them for the casualties and destruction caused by the U.S. 
forces who were “protecting” and “defending” South Vietnam and its popula¬ 
tion, according to unquestioned dogma. While the reporting was generally 
accurate in a narrow sense, the framework and the general picture presented 
are outlandish, and conform closely to the demands of the state propaganda 
system. It is, once again, highly revealing that Freedom House regards such 
service to the state as unremarkable—indeed, insufficient, by its standards. 

The more general summaries in the Freedom House study leave the evi¬ 
dence presented far behind. Thus the ruins and destruction “were presented 
as symbolic evidence of a stunning ‘defeat’ (variously implied or defined) for 
allied forces” (I, 621). “The Americans, by their heavy use of firepower in a 
