murder or protect the citizenry—is ignored. But once again, the links 
to the top in the case of unworthy victims do not fit the propaganda 
format. Kinzer does a nice job of making the GAM murders seem to 
be part of the natural background—regrettable but inevitable, part of 
the complex inheritance of a troubled country, and possibly, it is hoped, 
to be rectified when the new civilian government takes power. 

In an attempt to gain support abroad, two of the remaining leaders 
of GAM, Nineth de Garcia and Herlindo Hideo de Aquino, traveled 
to Europe in March and April 1986, after the inauguration of the elected 
civilian president, Christian Democrat Vinicio Cerezo. One of their 
most important messages was that killings and disappearances had not 
abated at all during the first three months of Cerezo’s presidency, and 
that the death squads had actually reappeared and were active in 



86 MAXVFACTUR1KG CONSENT 


Guatemala City- Because of ill health* Nineth de Garcia canceled her 
visits in Washington, D.C, and flew directly from Europe to Chicago, 
where she was scheduled to receive the key to the city from Mayor 
Harold Washington- As she went through customs in Chicago, how¬ 
ever, the officials of the Immigration and Naturalization Service 
searched, interrogated, and harassed her for two hours, one of the 
customs officials calling her a subversive and a Communist. They also 
seized literature she carried and threatened to deport her, despite her 
intended brief stopover and valid visa. This intimidation had its effect, 
and Nineth de Garcia flew directly to Guatemala. A friend attended the 
banquet in her place to accept the key presented by Mayor Washington. 

This incident is revealing. It is unlikely that Sharansky or Walesa 
would be so treated by the INS, but if by some chance they were, the 
press outcry would be great. 111 When a press conference was held in 
Chicago by supporters of GAM to protest this outrage, the major media 
did not attend, and neither the press releases nor the follow-up letter 
from a congressional group signed by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan 
could break the silence. The convergence between Rea gan administra¬ 
tion policy toward Guatemala and media priorities was complete. (Ac¬ 
cording to two organizers of the Chicago press conference, full 
information on this event was given Steve Greenhouse, the New York 
Times's reporter in Chicago, but not a word about this incident ap¬ 
peared in the newspaper of record.) 

A press release by the Guatemalan army on September 17, 1986, 
accused GAM of conducting 

... a black campaign of falsehood . . . insults and insolence 
directed at the military institution that exceed [the boundaries] of 
