national, and U.S. government bodies such as Radio Free Europe and 
the CIA, and has long served as a virtual propaganda arm of the 
government and international right wing. It sent election monitors to 
the Rhodesian elections staged by Ian Smith in 1979 and found them 
“fair,” whereas the 1980 elections won by Mugabe under British super¬ 
vision it found dubious. Its election monitors also found the Salvadoran 
elections of 1982 admirable. 106 It has expended substantial resources in 
criticizing the media for insufficient sympathy with U.S. foreign-policy 
ventures and excessively harsh criticism of U.S. client states. Its most 
notable publication of this genre was Peter Braestrup's Big Storys which 
contended that the media's negative portrayal of the Tet offensive 
helped lose the war. The work is a travesty of scholarship, but more 
interesting is its premise: that the mass media not only should support 
any national venture abroad, but should do so with enthusiasm, such 
enterprises being by definition noble (see the extensive review of the 
Freedom House study in chapter 5 and appendix 3). In 1982, when the 
Reagan administration was having trouble containing media reporting 
of the systematic killing of civilians by the Salvadoran army. Freedom 
House came through with a denunciation of the “imbalance” in media 
reporting from El Salvador. 107 

Although the flak machines steadily attack the mass media, the media 
treat them well. They receive respectful attention, and their propagan- 
distic role and links to a larger corporate program are rarely mentioned 
or analyzed. AIM head, Reed Irvine's diatribes are frequently pub¬ 
lished, and right-wing network flacks who regularly assail the “liberal 
media,” such as Michael Ledeen, 108 are given Op-Ed column space, 
sympathetic reviewers, and a regular place on talk shows as experts. 
This reflects the power of the sponsors, including the well-entrenched 
position of the right wing in the mass media themselves. 109 

The producers of flak add to one another's strength and reinforce the 
command of political authority in its news-management activities. The 
government is a major producer of flak, regularly assailing, threatening, 
and “correcting” the media, trying to contain any deviations from the 
established line. News management itself is designed to produce flak. 
In the Reagan years, Mr. Reagan was put on television to exude charm 
to millions, many of whom berated the media when they dared to 
criticize the “Great Communicator,” 110 





A PROPAGANDA MODEL 29 


1.5. ANTICOMMUNISM AS A 
CONTROL MECHANISM 

