eat when they dine out, where they go and why.” 5 * There are excep¬ 
tional cases of companies willing to sponsor serious programs, some¬ 
times a result of recent embarrassments that call for a public-relations 
offset. 60 But even in these cases the companies will usually not want to 
sponsor close examination of sensitive and divisive issues—they prefer 
programs on Greek antiquities, the ballet, and items of cultural and 
national history and nostalgia. Bamouw points out an interesting con¬ 
trast: commercial-television drama “deals almost wholly with the here 
and now, as processed via advertising budgets,” but on public televi¬ 
sion, culture “has come to mean ‘other cultures/ .., American civiliza¬ 
tion, here and now, is excluded from consideration/ 361 

Television stations and networks are also concerned to maintain 
audience “flow” levels, i.e., to keep people watching from program to 
program, in order to sustain advertising ratings and revenue. Airing 
program interludes of documentary-cultural matter that cause station 
switching is costly, and over time a “free 51 (i.e., ad-based) commercial 
system will tend to excise it. Such documentary-cultural-critical 
materials will be driven out of secondary media vehicles as well, as these 
companies strive to qualify for advertiser interest, although there will 
always be some cultural-political programming trying to come into 
being or surviving on the periphery of the mainstream media. 


1.3. SOURCING MASS-MEDIA 
NEWS: THE THIRD FILTER 

The mass media are drawn into a symbiotic relationship with powerful 
sources of information by economic necessity and reciprocity of inter¬ 
est. The media need a steady, reliable flow of the raw material of news. 
They have daily news demands and imperative news schedules that 
they must meet. They cannot afford to have reporters and cameras at 
all places where important stories may break. Economics dictates that 
they concentrate their resources where significant news often occurs, 
where important rumors and leaks abound, and where regular press 







A propaganda model r§ 


conferences are held. The White House, the Pentagon* and the State 
Department* in Washington, D.C., are central nodes of such news 
activity. On a local basis* city hall and the police department are the 
subject of regular news “beats” for reporters. Business corporations and 
trade groups are also regular and credible purveyors of stories deemed 
