demonizing the Sandinistas and eliminating from Congress and the 
mass media all controversy beyond tactical debate over the means that 
should be employed to return Nicaragua to the “Central American 
mode” and “contain” its “aggressiveness” in attempting to defend itself 
from a murderous and destructive U.S. assault on al fronts. But it 
failed to win public support even for proxy army warfare against 
Nicaragua, and as the costs to the U*S* mounted, and the proxy war 
accompanied by embargo and other pressures succeeded in restoring 
the “Central American mode” of misery and suffering in Nicaragua and 
aborting the highly successful reforms and prospects for development 
of the early years after the overthrow of Washington's ally Somoza, 
elite opinion too shifted—quite dramatically, in fact—toward resort to 
other, more cost-effective means to attain shared ends* 13 The partial 
failures of the very well organized and extensive state propaganda 
effort, and the simultaneous rise of an active grass-roots oppositional 
movement with very limited media access, was crucial in making an 
outright U*S. invasion of Nicaragua unfeasible and driving the state 
underground, to illegal clandestine operations that could be better 




CONCLUSIONS 307 


concealed from the domestic population—with* in fact, considerable 
media complicity. 14 

Furthermore, while there have been important structural changes 
centralizing and strengthening the propaganda system, there have been 
counterforces at work with a potential for broader access. The rise of 
cable and satellite communications, while initially captured and domi¬ 
nated by commercial interests, has weakened the power of the network 
oligopoly and retains a potential for enhanced local-group access. 
There are already some 3,000 public-access channels in use in the 
United States, offering 20,000 hours of locally produced programs per 
week, and there are even national producers and distributors of pro¬ 
grams for access channels through satellites (e.g., Deep-Dish Televi¬ 
sion), as well as hundreds of local suppliers, although all of them must 
struggle for funding. Grass-roots and public-interest organizations 
need to recognize and try to avail themselves of these media (and 
organizational) opportunities. 15 Local nonprofit radio and television 
stations also provide an opportunity for direct media access that has 
been underutilized in the United States. In France, many local groups 
have their own radio stations. In a notable case, the progressive cooper¬ 
ative Longo Mai, in Upper Provence, has its own 24-hour-a-day Radio 
Zinzine, which has become an important community institution that 
has helped inform and activate many previously isolated farmers. The 
potential value of noncommercial radio can be perceived in sections of 
the country where stations such as Pacifica Radio offer a view of the 
world, depth of coverage, and scope of discussion and debate that is 
generally excluded from the major media. Public radio and television, 
despite having suffered serious damage during the Reagan years, also 
represent an alternative media channel whose resuscitation and im¬ 
provement should be of serious concern to those interested in contest¬ 
ing the propaganda system. 16 The steady commercialization of the 
publicly owned air waves should be vigorously opposed. In the long 
run, a democratic political order requires far wider control of and 
access to the media. Serious discussion of how this can be done, and 
the incorporation of fundamental media reform into political programs, 
should be high on progressive agendas, 17 

The organization and self-education of groups in the community 
and workplace, and their networking and activism, continue to be the 
fundamental elements in steps toward the democratization of our so¬ 
cial life and any meaningful social change. Only to the extent that such 
developments succeed can we hope to see media that are free and 
independent. 



Appendix i 


THE U.S. OFFICIAL OBSERVERS IN 
GUATEMALA, JULY 1-2, 1984 

For the July i, 1984, elections in Guatemala, the Reagan administration sent 
an observer team, headed by Republican Congressman Ralph Regula, that also 
included Congressmen Jack Hightower (Democrat, Texas) and Mickey Ed¬ 
wards (Republican, Oklahoma); Secretaries of State Jack Brier, of Kansas, and 
Ed Simcox, of Indiana; Father Kenneth Baker, editor of Homiletic and Pastoral 
Review , New York City; John Carbaugh, a Washington attorney; Jesse Fried¬ 
man, of the American Institute of Free Labor Development; Tom Kahn, of 
the AFL-CIO; Max Singer, of the Potomac Organization; and Howard Penni- 
man, the election specialist of the American Enterprise Institute. 1 This group, 
in Guatemala for a very brief stay, was transported around the country to 
“observe” on election day by helicopter, and made a brief statement and held 
a press conference on July 2. That statement and the press conference pro¬ 
ceedings were released by the U.S. embassy in Guatemala City on July 18,1984, 
and form the basis for the discussion below. 

Although Guatemala had been assailed by human-rights organizations for 
years for political murder on a vast scale and record-breaking numbers of 



“disappeared,” the words “murder” and “disappeared” do not appear in the 
remarks of any of the ten observers who spoke at the press conference. Other 
words or phrases never uttered were: “National Security Doctrine,” “Law of 
