York: H. Liveright, 1928); M. J. Crozier, S. P. Huntington, and J. Watanuki, 
The Crisis of Democracy: Report on the Govemability of Democracies to the 
Trilateral Commission (New York: New York University Press, 1975 )- For 
further discussion, see Noam Chomsky, Towards a New Cold War (New York: 
Pantheon, 1982), chapter 1. and references cited, particularly, Alex Carey, 
“Reshaping the Truth: Pragmatists and Propagandists in America,” Meanjin 
Quarterly (Australia), vol. 35, no. 4 (1976). 

5. Public Opinion, p. 248. Lippmann did not find this objectionable, as “the 
common interests very largely elude public opinion entirely, and can be' 
managed only by a specialized class whose personal interests reach beyond the 
locality” (p. 310). He was distressed that the incorrigible bias of the press might 
mislead the “specialized class” as well as the public. The problem, therefore, 
was how to get adequate information to the decision-making elites (pp. 31—32)* 
This, he believed, might be accomplished by development of a body of inde¬ 
pendent experts who could give the leadership unbiased advice. Lippmann 
raised no question about possible personal or class interests of the “specialized 
class” or the “experts” on whom they might choose to rely, on their ability, 
or their right, to articulate “the common interest.” 

6. For example, Claire Sterling and the experts of the Georgetown Center for 
Strategic and International Studies—Walter Laqueur, Michael Ledeen, and 


Robert Kupperman—have been established as the authorities on terrorism by 
the mass media; on the Sterling and Paul Henze role in working up the 
Bulgarian Connection in the plot against the pope, see chapter 4. In the case 
of Latin America, the media have been compelled to avoid the usual resort to 
the academic profession for expression of approved opinion, as the profession 
largely rejects the framework of state propaganda in this instance. It has 
therefore been necessary to create a new cadre of “experts” (Robert Leiken, 
Ronald Radosh, Mark Falcoff, Susan Kaufman Purcell, etc.) to whom they can 
turn to satisfy doctrinal needs. See Noam Chomsky, The Culture of Terrorism 
(Boston: South End Press, 1988), for examples. On the process of creating 
experts to meet system demands, see our chapter 1 under “Sourcing Mass- 
Media News.” 

7. Like other terms of political discourse, the word “democracy” has a techni¬ 
cal Orwellian sense when used in rhetorical flights, or in regular “news report¬ 
ing,” to refer to U.S. efforts to establish “democracy.” The term refers to 
systems in which control over resources and the means of violence ensures the 
rule of elements that will serve the needs of U.S. power. Thus the terror states 
of El Salvador and Guatemala are “democratic,” as is Honduras under the rule 
of the military and oligarchy, and the collection of wealthy businessmen, 
bankers, etc., organized by the United States as a front for the Somocista-led 
mercenary army created by the United States is entitled “the democratic 
resistance.” See further, chapter 3. 

8. In the eighty-five opinion columns on Nicaragua that appeared in the New 
York Times and the Washington Post in the first three months of 1986, during 
the “national debate” preceding the congressional votes on contra aid, not a 
single one mentioned this elementary fact. For a detailed review, see Noam 
Chomsky, “Introduction,” in Morris Morley and James Petras, The Reagan 
Administration and Nicaragua, Monograph 1 (New York: Institute for Media 
Analysis, 1987). 

9. Only two phrases in the eighty-five opinion columns cited in the previous 
footnote mentioned that the Nicaraguan government had carried out reforms; 
none of them compared Nicaragua with El Salvador and Guatemala on this 
important question. 

10. See Dianna Melrose, Nicaragua: The Threat of a Good Example? (Oxford: 
Oxfam, 1985); see also chapters 3, 5, and 7, below. 

11. In an article highly critical of the Reagan “peace plan” for Nicaragua in 
August 1987, Tom Wicker says, “Whatever his doctrine, the United States has 
no historic or God-given right to bring democracy to other nations; nor does 
such a purpose justify the overthrow of governments it does not like” (“That 
Dog Won’t Hunt,” New York Times, Aug. 6,1987). Wicker does not contest 
the claim that Reagan seeks democracy in Nicaragua; it is just that his means 
are dubious and his plan won’t work. We should note that Wicker is at the 
outer limits of expressible dissident opinion in the U.S. mass media. See 
further, chapter 3. For additional references and discussion, see Chomsky, 
Culture of Terrorism . 

12. For example, in response to the Guatemala peace accords of August 1987, 
the United States immediately escalated the supply flights required to keep its 
forces in Nicaragua in the field to the phenomenal level of two to three per 
day. The purpose was to undermine the accords by intensifying the fighting, 



NOTES TO PAGES 4-5 335 


334 NOTES TO PAGES xiii—3 


and to prevent Nicaragua from relaxing its guard so that it could be accused 
of failing to comply with the accords. These U.S. initiatives were by far the 
most serious violations of the accords, but they were virtually unmentioned in 
the media. For a detailed review, see Noam Chomsky, “Is Peace at Hand?” 
Z magazine (January 1988). 

13. Jacques Ellul, Propaganda (New York: Knopf, 1965), pp. 58-59. 

14. A careful reader of the Soviet press could learn facts about the war in Af¬ 
ghanistan that controvert the government line—see chapter 5, pp. 226-27— but 
these inconvenient facts would not be considered in the West to demonstrate 
the objectivity of the Soviet press and the adequacy of its coverage of this issue. 
