
The media did note that Romero opposed aid to the Salvadoran 


WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS $$ 


junta (which Carter provided anyway), but they failed to convey the 
depth of his hostility to U,S, policy and the importance of his opposi¬ 
tional role (although it was far more threatening to U,S, policy than 
Popieluszko was to the Soviet Union)* The press never mentioned the 
special emissary sent by Carter to the pope in an attempt to bring 
Romero into line, or the fact that the head of the Jesuit order in Central 
America was called to Rome, probably in response to this U.S. pres¬ 
sure* 37 The media also suppressed Romero’s appeal to the military to 
refuse to kill, a fact that would have made much clearer how strongly 
opposed he was to the official policies, and how convenient his murder 
was to the rulers of El Salvador* 

Although Romero was far and away the most important establish¬ 
ment figure aligned with the popular movements, the media pretended 
at first that the affiliation of his killers was a complete mystery* The 
Washington Post supposed an equal likelihood of a left- or right-wing 
source, and the Miami Herald noted on March 27 that “Both stood to 
benefit from any chaos his death might have created*” (No American 
paper suggested that Popieluszko might have been murdered by Soli¬ 
darity sympathizers to discredit the Polish government*) This foolish¬ 
ness was the minority position—the bulk of the press suggested that the 
killer was probably a rightist, but of obscure connection* The reliable 
Duarte suggested that the killing was too professional to be indige¬ 
nous—it must have been a contract job from the outside. This view was 
dutifully repeated by the New York Times, Time, Newsweek, and CBS 
News. 38 

If, as seemed very likely, the killer was a Salvadoran rightist, or 
someone in their employ, what was his connection, if any, with the army 
and security forces? We saw earlier that the linkages between the death 
squads and the army were close: there was at least some degree of 
common command, shared operations, and mutual protection. Could 
the killer have been a member of the armed forces? Given the links of 
the army to the paramilitary forces, wasn’t it likely that they knew who 
killed Romero? The U.S* mass media did not raise, let alone press, these 
questions* When D’Aubuisson’s link to the murder became public 
knowledge, the media failed to make this a big issue, and his close 
relations to the official forces were not examined and discussed* This 
is evidence of a propaganda system at work* 

Any possible U.S. connection to the crime was, of course, “far out,” 
and could not be raised in the U.S* media* That we don’t do this sort 
of thing is an ideological premise of the patriotic press, no matter what 
the facts of recent history tell us* 39 But still, the question might have 
been raised whether the environment that the United States was help- 



56 manufacturing consent 


in g to create in El Salvador, training and aiding a murderous army 
whose violence had driven Romero to passionate opposition, made the 
United States indirectly guilty of the murder? The press never dis¬ 
cussed this point either* The Times quotes Secretary of State Cyrus 
Vance on the murder: “Two weeks ago I wrote the Archbishop and said: 
l We share a repugnance for the violence provoked by both extremes 
that is taking the lives of innocent people* We deplore the efforts of 
those seeking to silence the voices of reason and moderation with 
explosives, intimidation and murder/ 5,40 The paper points out that the 
letter from Vance was in reply to Romero's appeal to cease supplying 
arms. The article failed to include the gist of Romero's argument, and 
it did not quote that part of Vance's letter that rejected the archbishop's 
appeal. The report also did not take note of Vance's serious misre¬ 
presentation of the archbishop's position when he says that “We share 
a repugnance [for] * . . both extremes"; Romero attributed the killings 
to the army and the right, not “both extremes." We may note also that 
while Romero was victimized by the very forces that Vance supported, 
and Romero's forecasts seem to be vindicated by his own murder, there 
is no hint in the account of any irony or criticism of Vance and his 
associates. Here the press cannot plead lack of knowledge. As later 
conceded, the media knew very well that the security forces were the 
source of the violence. 


2.3.5. Murder unavenged — or 
triumphant 

The assassins of Archbishop Romero were never “officially” discovered 
or prosecuted, and he joined the ranks of the tens of thousands of other 
Salvadorans murdered without justice being done. But in contrast with 
Popieluszko, the U.S. mass media seemed quite uninterested in who 
committed the act or in demanding just retribution. 

Subsequently, a great deal of evidence became available showing 
that Roberto D'Aubuisson was at the center of a conspiracy to murder 
Romero* On the basis of numerous interviews with Arena party activists 
and U.S. officials, and examination of State Department cables, investi¬ 
gative reporters Craig Pyes and Laurie Becklund claimed in 1983 that 
D'Aubuisson had planned the assassination with a group of active-duty 
military officers, who drew straws for the honor of carrying out the 
murder. 41 Former ambassador Robert White, who had access to State 
Department cables and other inside information during his tenure in 
