murderer” or one responsible for “genocide ” The terminological double 
standard is maintained reliably throughout the mainstream media. 94 

Less obvious but equally interesting is the difference in willingness 




INTRODUCTION XXXIX 


to identify the responsible parties for the killings of Pol Pot and Suharto. 
In the case of Pol Pot, there is no uncertainty or complexity: editorials 
and news articles uniformly make him and the Khmer Rouge leadership 
clearly and unambiguously responsible for all deaths in Cambodia dur¬ 
ing the period 1975-78- He was the “man who slaughtered two million” 
(USA Today), “the executioner 55 (Boston Globe) who “presided over the 
deaths” of his victims (Washington Post), “the man who drove Cambodia 
to ruin” (New York Times ). 

But in Suharto's case, we move to an ambiguous responsibility, which 
means none at all: in the New York Times, for example, “a 1965 coup led to 
the massacres of hundreds of thousands of supposed communists” (edi¬ 
torial, Aug. 23, 1996), where we have no agent doing the killing; or “a 
wave of violence that took up to 500*000 lives and led Suharto to seize 
power from Sukarno in a military coup” (Seth Mydans, Aug. 7* 1996), 
where the massacre not only has no agent, but is falsely situated before 
the takeover of power by Suharto. In a later piece, Mydans states that 
“more than 500,000 Indonesians are estimated to have died in a purge of 
leftists in 1965, the year Mr. Suharto came to power” (April 8, 1997). 
Note the passive voice, never used in connection with Pol Pot, the word 
“purge” instead of “slaughter 55 or “massacre,” and the continued failure 
to identify the agent. 

In the case of East Timor, also, the Times is uncertain about the source 
of the killing: “This is one of the world's sadder places, where 100,000 to 
200,000 people died from 1974 in a brutal civil war and the consequent 
invasion through combat, execution, disease and starvation... (Steven 
Erlanger, Oct. 21, 1990). In addition to the lack of a clear agent, this sen¬ 
tence seriously misrepresents the facts—the civil war was short and left 
small numbers dead; and the invasion was not “consequent” to a brutal 
civil war, except in Indonesian propaganda. 

Another important difference in the treatment of the “worthy 55 victims 
of Pol Pot and the “unworthy” victims of Suharto is in the willingness to 
explain away the killings. With Pol Pot, as we describe in chapter 7, the 
background of the first phase of the genocide was completely blacked out 
in the mainstream account—‘there is no qualification to Pol Pot 5 s respon¬ 
sibility as a killer because his forces had undergone terrible damage and 
sought vengeance for the crimes they had suffered; nor are any deaths in 
Pol Pot 5 s years of rule to be explained by the starvation and disease 
already pervasive in April 1975. No, the only mentionable background is 
his Paris training and Communist fanaticism. 

But with Suharto we encounter a whole new world of contextualized 
apologetics. For many years the main protective formula was that the 
1965-66 killings were “a result of a failed coup, 55 which “touched off 



xl INTRODUCTION 


a wave of violence,” or followed an "onslaught from the left.” 95 This 
formula, invoked repeatedly* suggests that the mass killings were pro¬ 
voked and thus maybe justified by a prior “onslaught ” The writers never 
explain why a failed coup could possibly justify a large-scale slaughter* 
but the hint is left hanging. In more recent years* usually in connection 
with the explanation and rationalization of the continuation of a dicta¬ 
torship* the media regularly juxtaposed political repression with “stabil¬ 
ity” and “growth”: “the signs of his success are everywhere,” although 
Suharto has brought these gains “by maintaining a tight grip on power 
and suppressing public criticism and political opposition ” 96 These state¬ 
ments, from the New York Times , offer a kind of context that the paper 
never gives to Castro* let alone a Pol Pot, and it shows an apologetic that 
runs deep. 

This apologetic extends to the Suharto invasion and occupation of 
East Timor, For years* New York Times reporters have claimed that In¬ 
donesia invaded in the midst of a civil war* 97 when in fact that civil war 
was over well before the invasion. The paper's news coverage of East 
Timor actually fell to zero as the Indonesian attacks and killings in East 
Timor reached a deadly peak in 1977-78* a slaughter that elsewhere 
would be called “genoridal.” And although Indonesia occupied East 
Timor in violation of standing U.N, rulings till its induced exit in 1999, 
the paper’s reporters repeatedly referred to East Timor as a “disputed 
province” and East Timorese resistance as “separatist*” thereby internal¬ 
izing and explicitly legitimizing the aggression and occupation, 98 

The bias and gentle treatment of Suharto and the Indonesian govern¬ 
ment in the media is once again correlated with U.S. policy support that 
dates back to the military coup and slaughters of 1965. These were 
greeted with enthusiasm by U.S, officials—then Secretary of Defense 
Robert McNamara referred to the events as one of the “dividends” of 
U,S. support for the Indonesian military—and the “boiling bloodbath” 
(Time) and “staggering mass slaughter” (New York Times) were also seen 
in the media as a “gleam of light” (James Rest on in the New York Times ). 99 
U.S. military and economic aid and diplomatic protection continued 
throughout the years of the Suharto dictatorship* and the media’s finding 
him a good genocidist followed accordingly. 
