Tale 

Tagliabue describes some alleged partial confirmations of Agca’s claims. The 
first is that “Mr. Ozbey said the Bulgarians had indeed wanted to use Mr. Agca 



to shoot the Pope, but did not trust him.” But this is not a partial confirmation 
if the net result was that the Bulgarians failed to hire Agca. Furthermore, 
another reporter present when Ozbey testified in Rome claims that Ozbey did 
not tell the court that the Bulgarians “wanted to use” Agca. According to 
Wolfgang Achtner, of ABC-TV News, in Rome, the only thing Ozbey said was 
that the Bulgarians “listened with interest, but behaved with indifference” (the 
translation by the Turkish interpreter in court), or “listened with interest but 
didn’t take it seriously” (Achtner’s own translation). In short, it would appear 
that Tagliabue has doctored the evidence. 

The other “partial confirmation” is that “Catli hinted at obscure secret 
service contacts with West German intelligence, and of payments for unspeci¬ 
fied purposes to Turks involved in the investigations.” This vague statement 
does not even mention the plot against the pope and is partial confirmation 
of nothing. The most important Catli evidence bearing on this point was his 
description of the attempt by the West German police to bribe Agca’s supposed 
co-conspirator Oral Celik to come to West Germany and confirm Agca’s 
claims. This supports the coaching hypothesis: accordingly, Tagliabue blacks 
it out. The only other testimony by Catli mentioning the secret services in¬ 
volved Gray Wolves leader Ali Batman, who told Catli he had heard from the 
German secret police that at a meeting in Romania, the Warsaw Pact powers 
had decided to kill the pope. This was apparently a leak of the forged SISMI 
document of May 19, 1981, which had made this claim. Thus the hearsay 
recounting of the substance of a forgery is Tagliabue’s “partial confirmation” 
of Agca’s claims of a plot. 

We should also note that while he cites these alleged “partial confirma¬ 
tions,” nowhere does Tagliabue list the contentions of Agca that remained 
unconfirmed. 


The Soviet-Bulgarian Motive 

Two of Tagliabue’s thirty-two paragraphs were devoted to expounding the 
Soviet motive in allegedly sponsoring Agca’s assassination attempt: “to crack 
religiously inspired resistance to Communist rule in Poland.” Tagliabue here 
follows a long-standing Times tradition of absolutely refusing to allow a coun¬ 
terargument to be voiced on this issue. Even if they covered their tracks well, 
a Soviet-inspired murder of the pope would have been blamed on the Soviets, 
solidified Polish hostility, and had enormously damaging effects on Soviet 
relations with Western Europe. Thus it would have been risky without any 
offsetting benefits. 5 

