Despite the common feature of ongoing conflict* however* electoral 
conditions were far more favorable in Nicaragua than in El Salvador 
and Guatemala, for several reasons. First* and crucially important* in 
the tatter countries, at the time of the elections the army was still 
engaged in mass slaughter of the civilian population, with the toll in the 
tens of thousands in each country and the killing often carried out with 
extreme sadism. Nothing remotely similar was true in Nicaragua, These 
facts, which are not controversial among people with a minimal concern 
for reality* immediately establish a fundamental distinction with regard 
to the electoral climate. In countries that are being subject to the terror 
of a rampaging murder machine* supported or run by a foreign power* 
electoral conditions are fatally compromised in advance* a point that 
the media would recognize at once if we were considering the sphere 
of influence of some official enemy . 11 

A further—and related—distinction was that the ruling Sandinista 
government was a popular government* which strove to serve majority 
needs and could therefore afford to allow greater freedom of speech and 
organization. The LASA report on the Nicaraguan election notes that 
their program “implies redistribution of access to wealth and public 
services. The state will use its power to guarantee fulfillment of the 
basic needs of the majority population.” The “logic of the majority*” 
the report continues, also implies the involvement of “very large num¬ 
bers of people in the decisions that affect their lives .” 12 Qualified ob¬ 
servers conclude that the Nicaraguan government pursued this logic, 
although this fact is excluded from the free press. After citing the 
World Bank's observation that “Governments . . . vary greatly in the 
commitment of their political leadership to improving the condition of 
the people and encouraging their active participation in the develop¬ 
ment process*” Dianna Melrose* of the charitable development agency 
Oxfam* states that “From Oxfam’s experience of working in seventy-six 
developing countries, Nicaragua was to prove exceptional in the 
strength of that Government commitment .” 13 The Salvadoran and 
Guatemalan governments* by contrast, were ruled by elites that had 
been struggling desperately for decades to avoid the veiy kinds of 
reforms the Sandinistas were implementing. Extreme repression was 
the longstanding method of control of the majority in El Salvador and 
Guatemala* with vigorous and unceasing U.S- support. The aim of this 
repression was to keep the populace apathetic and to destroy popular 
organizations that might lay the basis for meaningful democracy. The 




LEGITIMIZING VERSUS MEANINGLESS THIRD WORLD ELECTIONS 93 

Sandinistas were engaged in mobilizing the majority and involving them 
in political life* which they could afford to do because their programs 
were intended to serve the general population* 

A third factor affecting electoral conditions was that in El Salvador 
and Guatemala the conflict was internal* and violence against the ma* 
jority was integral to the struggle. In Nicaragua* the conflict was one 
involving an externally sponsored aggression that had very limited 
internal support. The Sandinistas could appeal to nationalist senti¬ 
ments* easily mobilized against Yankee-organized terrorism. The Sal¬ 
vadoran and Guatemalan governments could hardly do the same—the 
Salvadoran government especially had to contend with a negative na¬ 
tionalist reaction to obvious foreign (i,e.* U-S.) domination and manipu¬ 
lation of its affairs, a fact that reached the level of absurdity when 
Duarte, visiting Washington in the fall of 1987, made himself an object 
of ridicule throughout Latin America by promptly kissing the American 
flag* While the Sandinistas did increasingly crack down on internal 
supporters of the contras as the conflict intensified* by the standards the 
United States usually applies to this region dissenters were dealt with 
remarkably benignly in Nicaragua* 14 In El Salvador and Guatemala* the 
ruling elites could not afford such toleration* and repression by large- 
scale terror had long been institutionalized in these states. 

A fourth factor making for a more benign electoral environment in 
Nicaragua, paradoxically* was U.S* hostility and the power of its propa¬ 
ganda machine* Every arrest or act of harassment in Nicaragua was 
publicized and transformed into evidence of the sinister quality of the 
Sandinista government in the free press of the United States* Mean¬ 
while* as we described in chapter 2* the Guatemalan and Salvadoran 
regimes could indulge in torture* rape, mutilation* and murder on a 
daily and massive basis without invoking remotely proportional atten¬ 
tion* indignation, or inferences about the quality of these regimes* In 
the context* the Nicaraguan government was under intense pressure to 
toe the mark, whereas the U,S- satellites were free to murder at will 
without serious political cost. 

Let us examine briefly how El Salvador* Guatemala* and Nicaragua 
compared in the individual categories of conditions of a free election* 
before we turn to the media treatment of these issues* 


3*2*1* Free speech and assembly* 

In El Salvador* the right to free speech and free assembly was legally 
suspended under a state-of-siege order of March 7, 1980, Decree No* 




94 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


507 of December 3* 1980, essentially destroyed the judicial system, 
permitting the armed forces to hold citizens without charge or evidence 
