
WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS 65 


were part of the Polish government. In the case of the four American 
women, it was barely evident in the mass media that the killers had any 
connection with the Salvadoran government. This was in keeping with 
the basic myth, also consistently followed by the media, that the Sal¬ 
vadoran government was reformist and centrist, trying to control kill¬ 
ings by extremists of the right and left, 57 This fabrication allowed a 
two-track system of massive killing by the army and its affiliates and 
simultaneous claims of regret by the reformers unable to control the 
extremists. This was reminiscent of the heyday of mass murder in 
Argentina, when the New York Times regularly portrayed the junta and 
people like the recently convicted General Videla as moderates “unable 
to control the right-wing extremists" who were killing people. 58 

The most important goal of the immediate damage-containment 
process was to stifle any serious investigation of the responsibility of the 
officials of the Salvadoran government. The Salvadoran strategy was 
foot-dragging from beginning to end, as the idea of convicting soldiers 
for killing anybody was contrary to Salvadoran practice, and, moreover, 
there is little doubt that the responsibility for the crime went high. The 
U.S. official strategy, once it was clear that the National Guard was 
responsible for the killing, was to get the low-levei killers tried and 
convicted—necessary to vindicate the system of justice in El Salvador, 
at least to the extent of keeping the dollars flowing from Congress— 
while protecting the “reformers” at the top. On September 30, 1981, 
Ambassador Deane Hinton stated with assurance that the local national 
guardsmen “were acting on their own," although internal State Depart¬ 
ment documents of the time recognized that the Salvadoran investiga¬ 
tion had been a joke, and other evidence existed suggesting top-level 
involvement, 59 Nonetheless, the official position was clear. To go along 
with the official line, the mass media had to stop investigating high-level 
involvement and even to suppress evidence emerging from other 
sources. And so they proceeded to do this. 

After a two-month investigation of the murders, the reporter John 
Dinges filed a story through Pacific News Service that showed the 
murders to have been preplanned in some detail, 60 First, there were 
intercepted radio communications indicating military discussions of the 
arrival of the women at the airport, and other evidence of close surveil¬ 
lance of their flight plans, all suggesting a coordinated and extensive 
military operation. Second, a former deputy minister of planning de¬ 
scribed to Dinges a half-hour presentation by Salvadoran Defense 
Minister Guillermo Garcia in the national palace, denouncing the nuns 
and priests in the very area of the murders and stating that something 
must be done, only two weeks prior to the murders. 



66 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


In a remarkable feat of self-censorship* most of the mass media 
completely ignored the Dinges findings. Dinges’s report appeared in the 
Washington Post, the Los Angeles Times , and some fifteen other papers* 
but not a word of it found its way into the New York Times, Time * 
Newsweek, or CBS News* and its leads were not pursued by any media. 
Instead* the media kept repeating the assurances of Duarte and U.S. 
officials that they were satisfied that the killings did not go beyond the 
local national guardsmen* and that the matter would be pursued dili¬ 
gently through proper legal channels. 

In March 1984* Colonel Roberto Santivanez* a high official in Sal¬ 
vadoran intelligence* agreed to “talk” about the death-squad network 
in El Salvador* and his claims found their way onto CBS News and the 
front page of the New York Times . 61 Santivanez gave highly credible 
details about the murder of the four women* indicating that the act had 
been committed on the specific order of Colonel Oscar Edgardo Casa¬ 
nova* who was in charge of the zone in which the killings took place. 
Colonel Casanova was transferred to another assignment two weeks 
after the murder as part of the official cover-up. His first cousin Eu¬ 
genio Vides Casanova* the minister of defense chosen by Duane and 
head of the National Guard in December 1980, knew about the murder 
order by his cousin* as did Duarte. Although this crushing evidence 
implicated a high officer in the murder and the current minister of 
defense and Duarte in the cover-up* there was no follow-up to this 
story* no connection back to the Dinges story of high-level discussions 
of the need to do something about the religious workers—no editorials, 
no indignation* and no pressure for action. 

In sum* the leads provided by Dinges* and the testimony of Santi¬ 
vanez, strongly suggest that the killing of the women was based on a 
high-level decision. The evidence is even clearer that middle-level 
officials of the government ordered the killing* and that the highest- 
level officials engaged in a continuing and systematic cover-up. In the 
Polish case* the evidence of top-level involvement was never forthcom¬ 
ing* but the issue was pursued by the U.S. mass media relentlessly* In 
the case of the four churchwomen* where the evidence of top-level 
involvement was abundant, the U.S. mass media failed to press the 
matter, or even to engage in the pursuit of obvious investigative leads. 

We cannot describe here the full details of the failure of the Salvado¬ 
ran process of justice, which never moved forward except under U.S. 
pressure and threats. 62 The mass media did at one point berate the 
Salvadoran government for “stonewalling” the investigation* 63 but the 
media entirely failed to capture the depth and scope of the stonewalling 
process* or to remark on its significance in this “fledgling democracy* 5 * 

