the facts of recent history tell us* 39 But still, the question might have 
been raised whether the environment that the United States was help- 



56 manufacturing consent 


in g to create in El Salvador, training and aiding a murderous army 
whose violence had driven Romero to passionate opposition, made the 
United States indirectly guilty of the murder? The press never dis¬ 
cussed this point either* The Times quotes Secretary of State Cyrus 
Vance on the murder: “Two weeks ago I wrote the Archbishop and said: 
l We share a repugnance for the violence provoked by both extremes 
that is taking the lives of innocent people* We deplore the efforts of 
those seeking to silence the voices of reason and moderation with 
explosives, intimidation and murder/ 5,40 The paper points out that the 
letter from Vance was in reply to Romero's appeal to cease supplying 
arms. The article failed to include the gist of Romero's argument, and 
it did not quote that part of Vance's letter that rejected the archbishop's 
appeal. The report also did not take note of Vance's serious misre¬ 
presentation of the archbishop's position when he says that “We share 
a repugnance [for] * . . both extremes"; Romero attributed the killings 
to the army and the right, not “both extremes." We may note also that 
while Romero was victimized by the very forces that Vance supported, 
and Romero's forecasts seem to be vindicated by his own murder, there 
is no hint in the account of any irony or criticism of Vance and his 
associates. Here the press cannot plead lack of knowledge. As later 
conceded, the media knew very well that the security forces were the 
source of the violence. 


2.3.5. Murder unavenged — or 
triumphant 

The assassins of Archbishop Romero were never “officially” discovered 
or prosecuted, and he joined the ranks of the tens of thousands of other 
Salvadorans murdered without justice being done. But in contrast with 
Popieluszko, the U.S. mass media seemed quite uninterested in who 
committed the act or in demanding just retribution. 

Subsequently, a great deal of evidence became available showing 
that Roberto D'Aubuisson was at the center of a conspiracy to murder 
Romero* On the basis of numerous interviews with Arena party activists 
and U.S. officials, and examination of State Department cables, investi¬ 
gative reporters Craig Pyes and Laurie Becklund claimed in 1983 that 
D'Aubuisson had planned the assassination with a group of active-duty 
military officers, who drew straws for the honor of carrying out the 
murder. 41 Former ambassador Robert White, who had access to State 
Department cables and other inside information during his tenure in 
