defense by violence and injustice. The peoples 5 organizations, he told 
Carter, are “fighting to defend their most fundamental human rights* 5 
against a military establishment that “knows only how to repress the 



54 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


people and defend the interests of the Salvadorean oligarchy.” And in 
his di^ry, Romero completely repudiated the idea that the army was 
reacting to somebody else’s violence—the security forces are instru¬ 
ments “of a general program of annihilation of those on the left, who 
by themselves would not commit violence or further it were it not for 
social injustice that they want to do away with.” 33 Thus Joseph 
Treasteris statement on the front page of the New York Times that 
Romero “had criticized both the extreme right and the extreme left for 
widespread killing and torture in El Salvador” (Mar. 31, 1980) is 
straightforward lying: Romero never accused the left of torture or 
widespread killing, he never equated the right and the left, and he was 
quite clear that the government (an agent of the right) was the primary 
killer. In this respect, Romero’s perception, essentially the same as that 
privately conveyed to the press by the U.S. government, was grossly 
falsified in public by both the government and press. 34 

Interestingly, a year later, in an article marking the anniversary of 
the assassination of Archbishop Romero, Edward Schumacher, of the 
Times, noted that under Romero’s successor. Archbishop Rivera y 
Damas, “the church has moved to a more centrist position in the civil 
war between the Government and the guerrillas.” 35 Of course, if the 
church now takes a centrist position, as opposed to its position under 
Romero, this constitutes an admission that the theme played by 
Treaster and the Times a year previously of an even-handed Romero 
was a lie (which it was). Is it possible that the Times always finds the 
church in the middle and is lying one year later as well? The question 
must remain open, as his successor has been much more circumspect 
than Romero. The willingness of the right wing and the army to murder 
people like Romero might have affected Archbishop Rivera y Damas’s 
ability to speak his mind freely and forced public caution. The point 
does not arise for Schumacher and the Times . 36 


2.3*4* The loss of interest in 
responsibility at the top 

With Popieluszko, the media tried hard to establish that there was 
knowledge of and responsibility for the crime at higher levels of the 
Polish government. Soviet interest and possible involvement were also 
regularly invoked. With Romero, in contrast, no such questions were 
raised or pressed. 
