ate the quality of sources—the State Department is unchallenged be¬ 
cause it expounds the official and patriotic truth, Americas Watch is 
denigrated (and only rarely cited, even with a dismissing put-down) 
because it challenges official propaganda. Pravda could hardly be more 
subservient to state demands than Time in its coverage of demonstra¬ 
tion elections. 78 

The mass media’s sourcing on the Guatemalan election was confined 
almost entirely to U.S. officials and official observers, the most promi¬ 
nent Guatemalan political candidates, and generals. Spokespersons for 
the insurgents—what in Nicaragua would be labeled the “main opposi¬ 
tion”—the smaller parties, spokespersons for popular organizations, 
the churches, human-rights groups, and ordinary citizens, were essen¬ 
tially ignored by the media. Time f Newsweek and CBS News almost 
never talked to ordinary citizens or spokespersons for the insurgents. 
Stephen Kinzer, in the Times> had only one citation to a rebel source 
in several dozen articles on Guatemala during the election periods, 
although on election day in 1984 he did speak with a number of ordinary 
citizens (who gave a much less optimistic view than Kinzer’s usual 
sources). 

The restricted menu of media sources flows from and reinforces the 
media’s propensity to adopt a patriotic agenda. U.S. government offi¬ 
cials and observers are always optimistic and hopeful in their state¬ 
ments about sponsored elections. The leading contestant politicians are 
also moderately optimistic, as they have a good chance of acquiring at 
least nominal power. They do, however, express occasional doubts 
about whether the army will relinquish power. This allows the election 
drama to assume a slightly different character from that in El Salvador, 
where it was the democratic army “protecting the election” versus the 
undemocratic rebels who refused to lay down their arms and partici¬ 
pate. In Guatemala, the frame was: Will the generals keep their promise 
to stay in the barracks? The triumph is that they do stay in the bar¬ 
racks—a civilian president takes office and now “rules.” The media 
then quickly drop the subject, so that whether the army really does 
relinquish power to the civilian leaders is never checked out (just as the 
“peace” sought by the populace in El Salvador was never considered 
in retrospect). In Poland, in January 1947, and Nicaragua, in 1984, and 
in enemy states generally, the focus was on the substance of power, and 
the extent to which that power shaped the electoral results in advance, 
as by limiting the ability of important constituencies to run for office 
and compete effectively. Not so for Guatemala. 


LEGITIMIZING VERSUS MEANINGLESS THIRD WORLD ELECTIONS 113 


If the mass media had enlarged their sources, fundamental condi¬ 
tions would have assumed greater prominence. For example, before 
both the July I, 1984, and December 1985 elections in Guatemala, the 
Guatemala Bishops 5 Conference issued pastoral statements that sug¬ 
gested in no uncertain terms and with detailed arguments that condi¬ 
tions in the country were incompatible with a free election. Its pastoral 
letter of June 8,1984, focused on the civil-defense patrols as “suscepti¬ 
ble to manipulation, 15 and it discussed the disappearances, “insatiable 
corruption, 51 and the fact that sociopolitical structures are “not capable 
of promoting the welfare of the whole society,* 579 Stephen Kinzer men¬ 
tioned this report in a Times news article of July 22, 1984, but his 
reference is made after the election of July 1, and Kinzer did not use 
it to frame the discussion of electoral conditions and to arrive at an 
assessment of the quality of the election. Furthermore, his summary of 
the twenty-seven-page report, that it “denounced torture, electoral 
fraud, concentration of wealth and ‘massacres of entire families, 5 J * 
ignores the quite specific critique of the conditions bearing on an elec¬ 
tion, Time mentioned this pastoral letter briefly; Newsweek and CBS 
News never mentioned it. 

In connection with the 1985 election, the bishops put forth another 
powerful statement, once again questioning whether an election can be 
meaningful in “a situation close to slavery and desperation, 5580 They 
point out that the civil-defense patrols, the “ideology of national secu¬ 
rity,* 5 and hunger and impoverishment are not conducive to serious 
elections: 

In order that the longed-for results be obtained, there must be not 
only the freedom at the moment of casting one 5 s vote, but also a 
whole series of particular social, political and economic conditions 
which are, unfortunately, not happening in Guatemala. In effect 
there still persist in Guatemala harsh violence, lack of respect for 
human rights and the breaking of basic laws. It is a fact that any 
citizen pressured, terrorized or threatened is not fully able to 
exercise his/her right to vote or to be elected conscientiously. 

This letter was not mentioned in the major media or anywhere else, to 
our knowledge, although the bishops are conservative, credible, and 
one of the few organized bodies in Guatemala not crushed by state 
terror. 

There were other dissenting voices in Guatemala—politicians of the 
lesser parties, union officials, human-rights groups, lawyers, and ju¬ 
rists—who spoke out occasionally on the limits to free electoral condi- 



114 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


tions in Guatemala. And there were events of note that threw a power¬ 
ful light on the subject. Most of these were blacked out in the ILS, mass 
media. For example/ 1 on July 4,1984* the Guatemalan Human, Rights 
