
When there is little or no elite dissent from a government policy, 
there may still be some slippage in the mass media, and facts that tend 
to undermine the government line, if they are properly understood, can 
be found, usually on the back pages of the newspapers. This is one of 
the strengths of the tLS* system. It is possible that the volume of 
inconvenient facts can expand, as it did during the Vietnam War, in 
response to the growth of a critical constituency (which included elite 
elements from 1968)* Even in this exceptional case, however, it was very 
rare for news and commentary to find their way into the mass media 
if they failed to conform to the framework of established dogma (post¬ 
ulating benevolent U.S* aims, the United States responding to aggres¬ 
sion and terror, etc,), as we discuss in chapter 5* During and after the 
Vietnam War, apologists for state policy commonly pointed to the 
inconvenient facts, the periodic “pessimism” of media pundits, and the 
debates over tactics as showing that the media were “adversarial” and 
even “lost” the war. These allegations are ludicrous, as we show in 
detail in chapter 5 and appendix 3, but they did have the dual advantage 
of disguising the actual role of the mass media and, at the same time, 
pressing the media to keep even more tenaciously to the propaganda 
assumptions of state policy. We have long argued that the “naturalness” 
of these processes, with inconvenient facts allowed sparingly and within 
the proper framework of assumptions, and fundamental dissent virtu¬ 
ally excluded from the mass media (but permitted in a marginalized 
press), makes for a propaganda system that is far more credible and 
effective in putting over a patriotic agenda than one with official censor¬ 
ship. 

In criticizing media priorities and biases we often draw on the media 
themselves for at least some of the facts. This affords the opportunity 
for a classic non sequitur, in which the citations of facts from the 
mainstream press by a critic of the press is offered as a triumphant 
“proof” that the criticism is self-refuting, and that media coverage of 
disputed issues is indeed adequate. That the media provide some facts 
about an issue, however, proves absolutely nothing about the adequacy 
or accuracy of that coverage. The mass media do, in fact, literally 
suppress a great deal, as we will describe in the chapters that follow. 
But even more important in this context is the question of the attention 




PREFACE Ixili 


given to a fact—its placement, tone, and repetitions, the framework of 
analysis within which it is presented, and the related facts that accom¬ 
pany it and give it meaning (or preclude understanding). That a careful 
reader looking for a fact can sometimes find it with diligence and a 
skeptical eye tells us nothing about whether that fact received the 
