In his recent book Vietnam and Other American Fantasies * H. Bruce 
Franklin* who had previously exposed the fallacies and cult qualities of 



XXXVI INTRODUCTION 


the POW-MIA myth, addressed this issue once again, as well as other 
fantasies (such as the claim that the antiwar activists often spit at return¬ 
ing veterans). 84 Franklin’s book was reviewed in the Los Angeles Times 
but was otherwise only twice mentioned in passing in the U.S, main¬ 
stream press. On the other hand, a book by Michael Lind, Vietnam; The 
Necessary War * 5 which explains that the war was justifiable because com¬ 
munism was on the march, US. “credibility” was at stake, and the Viet¬ 
namese communists were cruel and ruthless—demonstrated in part by 
their refusal to surrender and consequent responsibility for those killed 
by U.S. bombs!—was treated differently. It received forty-four reviews 
and was mentioned twenty-seven other times in the mainstream media* 
and Lind was given Op-Ed space in both the New York Times and the 
Washington Post , among other opportunities. 

In his review of Lind’s book, Vietnam War historian Lloyd Gardner 
noted that any U.S. “credibility” problem that arose in connection with 
the Vietnam war was a creation of the war managers themselves and 
flowed from their own decisions; and Gardner also comments, after ana¬ 
lyzing a series of lind arguments in defense of the war* that “the evidence 
simply washes away his positions like a sand castle on the beach ” 86 But 
Lind was saying what the elite wants said, and Franklin was not, so that 
mainstream media treatment followed accordingly. 


Laos 

Laos’s Plain of Jars was subjected to some of the heaviest bombings of 
civilian targets in history, especially after 1968* when Washington was 
compelled under domestic pressure to enter negotiations with North 
Vietnam and had to terminate its bombing there. It turned to Laos, 
although that small peasant country was a marginal factor in the wars; 
but Nixon and Kissinger could hardly leave U.S. bombers inactive. Over¬ 
all, some 2 million tons of bombs were dropped on Laos. These raids 
wiped out 353 villages and killed thousands of civilians, and they con¬ 
tinue to kill now, as the Plain was saturated with hundreds of millions 
of “bombies”—tiny antipersonnel weapons specifically designed to kill 
and maim. With their 20-to-30 percent failure-to-explode rate, they re¬ 
mained as potential killers, and their casualty rate is still high, estimates 
running from hundreds to 20*000 or more per year, half of them deaths 
and half of the victims children, 87 

There have been efforts to deal with this humanitarian catastrophe. 
