cost of a new London daily was 50*000 pounds. The Sunday Express, 
launched in 1918* spent over two million pounds before it broke even 
with a circulation of over 250,0007 

Similar processes were at work in the United States* where the 
start-up cost of a new paper in New York City in 1851 was $69*000; the 
public sale of the Sr. Louis Democrat in 1872 yielded $456*000; and city 
newspapers were selling at from $6 to $18 million in the 1920s. 8 The cost 
of machinery alone* of even very small newspapers* has for many 
decades run into the hundreds of thousands of dollars; in 1945 it could 
be said that “Even small-newspaper publishing is big business ... [and] 
is no longer a trade one takes up lightly even if he has substantial 
cash—or takes up at all if he doesn't.” 9 

Thus the first filter—the limitation on ownership of media with any 
substantial outreach by the requisite large size of investment—was 
applicable a century or more ago* and it has become increasingly effec¬ 
tive over time. 10 In 1986 there were some 1*500 daily newspapers, 11*000 
magazines* 9,000 radio and 1*500 TV stations, 2*400 book publishers, 
and seven movie studios in the United States—over 25,000 media 
entities in all. But a large proportion of those among this set who were 
news dispensers were very small and local, dependent on the large 
national companies and wire services for all but local news. Many more 
were subject to common ownership* sometimes extending through vir¬ 
tually the entire set of media variants. 11 

Ben Bagdikian stresses the fact that despite the large media numbers, 
the twenty-nine largest media systems account for over half of the 
output of newspapers* and most of the sales and audiences in maga¬ 
zines, broadcasting* books, and movies. He contends that these “consti¬ 
tute a new Private Ministry of Information and Culture” that can set 
the national agenda. 12 

Actually* while suggesting a media autonomy from corporate and 
government power that we believe to be incompatible with structural 
facts (as we describe below), Bagdikian also may be understating the 
degree of effective concentration in news manufacture. It has long been 
noted that the media are tiered, with the top tier—as measured by 
prestige* resources* and outreach—comprising somewhere between ten 
and twenty-four systems, 13 It is this top tier* along with the government 
and wire services* that defines the news agenda and supplies much of 





A PROPAGANDA MODEL 5 


the national and international news to the lower tiers of the media* and 
thus for the general public, 14 Centralization within the top tier was 
substantially increased by the post-World War II rise of television and 
the national networking of this important medium. Pre-television news 
markets were local* even if heavily dependent on the higher tiers and 
a narrow set of sources for national and international news; the net¬ 
works provide national and international news from three national 
sources* and television is now the principal source of news for the 
public. 15 The maturing of cable, however* has resulted in a fragmenta¬ 
tion of television audiences and a slow erosion of the market share and 
power of the networks. 

Table 1-1 provides some basic financial data for the twenty-four 
media giants (or their controlling parent companies) that make up the 
top tier of media companies in the United States. 16 This compilation 
includes: (i) the three television networks: ABC (through its parent, 
Capital Cities), CBS* and NBC (through its ultimate parent, General 
Electric [GE]); (2) the leading newspaper empires: New York Time$> 
Washington Pasty Los Angeles Times (Times-Mirror)* Wall Street Journal 
(Dow Jones)* Kmght-Ridder, Gannett, Hearst* Scripps-Howard, New- 
house (Advance Publications), and the Tribune Company; (3) the major 
news and general-interest magazines: Time, Newsweek (subsumed 
under Washington Post), Reader^ Digest, TV Guide (Triangle)* and U.S, 
News 6 s World Report ; (4) a major book publisher (McGraw-Hill); and 
(5) other cable-TV systems of large and growing importance: those of 
Murdoch* Turner, Cox, General Corp., Taft, Storer* 17 and Group W 
(Westinghouse). Many of these systems are prominent in more than one 
field and are only arbitrarily placed in a particular category (Time, Inc.* 
is very important in cable as well as magazines; McGraw-Hill is a major 
publisher of magazines; the Tribune Company has become a large force 
in television as well as newspapers; Hearst is important in magazines 
as well as newspapers; and Murdoch has significant newspaper interests 
as well as television and movie holdings). 

These twenty-four companies are large, profit-seeking corporations, 
owned and controlled by quite wealthy people. It can be seen in table 
i-i that all but one of the top companies for whom data are available 
have assets in excess of $1 billion, and the median size (middle item by 
size) is $2,6 billion. It can also be seen in the table that approximately 
three-quarters of these media giants had after-tax profits in excess of 
$100 million, with the median at $183 million. 

Many of the large media companies are fully integrated into the 
market, and for the others, too, the pressures of stockholders, directors, 
and bankers to focus on the bottom line are powerful. These pressures 




6 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 

