



62 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


report also noted that those present at the disinterment found “exten¬ 
sive” wounds and that “the bodies were also bruised,” Raymond Bon¬ 
ner's account in Weakness and Deceit, noted that 

In the crude grave, stacked on top of each other were the bodies 
of four women. The first hauled out of the hole was Jean Donovan, 
twenty-seven years old, a lay missionary from Cleveland. Her face 
had been blown away by a high calibre bullet that had been fired 
into the back of her head. Her pants were unzipped; her under- 
* wear twisted around her ankles. When area peasants found her, 
she was nude from the waist down. They had tried to replace the 
garments before burial. Then came Dorothy Kazel, a forty-year- 
old Ursuline nun also from Cleveland. At the bottom of the pit 
were Maryknoll nuns Ita Ford, forty, and Maura Clarke, forty- 
nine, both from New York, Ail the women had been executed at 
close range. The peasants who found the women said that one had 
her underpants stuffed in her mouth; another's had been tied over 
her eyes. All had been raped. 

We may note the failure of Time and the New York Times to mention 
the bruises {which both of these publications mentioned and repeated, 
as regards Popieluszko); the failure to mention the destruction of Jean 
Donovan's face; the suppression of the degrading and degraded use of 
the nuns' underwear; 54 the failure to give the account of the peasants 
who found the bodies. These and other details given by Bonner and 
suppressed by Time and the New York Times (and also Newsweek and 
CBS News) add emotional force and poignancy to the scene. Such 
details are included for a Popieluszko, but not for four American 
women murdered by a U.S. client state. The Rogers report also pointed 
out that the forensic surgeons sent to the scene of the crime by the 
junta, at the urging of Ambassador Robert White, refused to perform 
an autopsy on the ground that no surgical masks were available. This 
touch, which would have cast the junta and its agents in a bad light, 
was also omitted from U.S. media accounts. 

In the Popieluszko case, both the finding of the body and the trial 
were occasions for an aggressive portrayal of the details of the act of 
murder and the condition of the body. The mass-media reticence on 
such matters at the time of the finding of the bodies of the four women 
was exceeded by their restraint at the trial. Lydia Chavez, of the New 
York Times, who attended the trial, notes that there were eight hours 
of testimony and seven hours of argument that focused on the women's 
work in El Salvador “and on the details of their kidnappings and 
