
66 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


In a remarkable feat of self-censorship* most of the mass media 
completely ignored the Dinges findings. Dinges’s report appeared in the 
Washington Post, the Los Angeles Times , and some fifteen other papers* 
but not a word of it found its way into the New York Times, Time * 
Newsweek, or CBS News* and its leads were not pursued by any media. 
Instead* the media kept repeating the assurances of Duarte and U.S. 
officials that they were satisfied that the killings did not go beyond the 
local national guardsmen* and that the matter would be pursued dili¬ 
gently through proper legal channels. 

In March 1984* Colonel Roberto Santivanez* a high official in Sal¬ 
vadoran intelligence* agreed to “talk” about the death-squad network 
in El Salvador* and his claims found their way onto CBS News and the 
front page of the New York Times . 61 Santivanez gave highly credible 
details about the murder of the four women* indicating that the act had 
been committed on the specific order of Colonel Oscar Edgardo Casa¬ 
nova* who was in charge of the zone in which the killings took place. 
Colonel Casanova was transferred to another assignment two weeks 
after the murder as part of the official cover-up. His first cousin Eu¬ 
genio Vides Casanova* the minister of defense chosen by Duane and 
head of the National Guard in December 1980, knew about the murder 
order by his cousin* as did Duarte. Although this crushing evidence 
implicated a high officer in the murder and the current minister of 
defense and Duarte in the cover-up* there was no follow-up to this 
story* no connection back to the Dinges story of high-level discussions 
of the need to do something about the religious workers—no editorials, 
no indignation* and no pressure for action. 

In sum* the leads provided by Dinges* and the testimony of Santi¬ 
vanez, strongly suggest that the killing of the women was based on a 
high-level decision. The evidence is even clearer that middle-level 
officials of the government ordered the killing* and that the highest- 
level officials engaged in a continuing and systematic cover-up. In the 
Polish case* the evidence of top-level involvement was never forthcom¬ 
ing* but the issue was pursued by the U.S. mass media relentlessly* In 
the case of the four churchwomen* where the evidence of top-level 
involvement was abundant, the U.S. mass media failed to press the 
matter, or even to engage in the pursuit of obvious investigative leads. 

We cannot describe here the full details of the failure of the Salvado¬ 
ran process of justice, which never moved forward except under U.S. 
pressure and threats. 62 The mass media did at one point berate the 
Salvadoran government for “stonewalling” the investigation* 63 but the 
media entirely failed to capture the depth and scope of the stonewalling 
process* or to remark on its significance in this “fledgling democracy* 5 * 

