“The Gulf of Tonkin incident,” HaUin observes, “was a classic of 
Cold War news management, . , , On virtually every important point, 
the reporting of the two Gulf of Tonkin incidents , * , was either 
misleading or simply false”—and in accordance with the needs of the 
U.S. executive at that crucial moment. The New York Times had re¬ 
ported sabotage missions against the North as recently as July 23, and 
reported Hanoi’s August 2 protest of an attack on North Vietnamese 
villages by Laotian Air Force planes, but neither the Times nor the 
Washington Post mentioned these facts “either at the time of the inci¬ 
dents or in the weeks that followed, aside from inconspicuous sidebars 
on Hanoi’s 'allegations 5 [which were accurate, but dismissed] and a 
passing reference 55 in a column by James Reston. The reporting was 
“objective 55 in that it correctly reported U.S. government statements, 
raising no question about them, presenting no relevant background, and 
marginally citing Communist denials while proceeding to report the 
events as Washington wished them to be perceived* 93 

In subsequent weeks, the Times published a number of brief refer¬ 
ences to what was “charged 55 or “asserted 55 in the generally accurate 
reports from North Vietnam, which were rejected and dismissed by 
reporters while front-page stories and headlines presented the false 
Washington version as fact, with much speculation about Hanoi’s mo¬ 
tives in sending a few patrol boats to attack the mighty U,S, Seventh 
Fleet* The relevant background continued to be ignored or buried with 
marginal references in back pages* The criticism by Senator Morse was 
barely mentioned, and dismissed* There was no hint of administration 
doubts that the August 4 incident had even taken place." 

The newsweeklies adhered still more rigidly to the government prop¬ 
aganda line, even providing vivid and dramatic accounts of the August 
4 incident, which apparently never took place* The accurate criticism 
by Senators Gruening and Morse received a few lines, dismissed as 
“predictable” responses by the “irascible 55 Morse. There was no inter¬ 
est in their charge that the Tonkin Gulf resolution had been predated, 
also dismissed by the Times without inquiry. North Vietnamese and 
Chinese reactions were dismissed as “bluster” by Communists who 
“boiled with hatred and hostility toward the U,S*” (Newsweek) and 
“propaganda blasts” (US, News & World Report). None of the weeklies 
considered the possibility that U,S* actions might have provoked the 
August 2 incident, or that there were doubts in Washington about the 
August 4 attack, although some of the relevant facts had been briefly 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (l)* VIETNAM 209 


noted (e.g., Time, July 31* noting missions inside North Vietnam by 
parachuted sabotage teams). The U.S. government version was simply 
adopted as unquestioned truth, with no further discussion or inquiry 
necessary. 100 

There were ample grounds at the time for suspicion about the U.S. 
government version. The foreign press was able to see that serious 
questions arose. Le Monde presented public statements on all sides 
and an analysis of what the public record indicated. “Neither the 
Times nor the Post made any such analysis of the record,” simply 
taking the false Washington version to be correct and dismissing the 
accurate Communist “allegations” with a bare mention. 101 In London, 
the New Statesman covered the U.S. and Chinese versions, including 
the (accurate) Chinese account of the U.S.-Saigon actions that 
preceded the incidents and the charge that the first was provoked by 
Washington while the second never occurred, and concluding that 
“the incidents in Vietnam do not seem quite as simple as the initial 
headlines indicated” (a substantial understatement). In the United 
States, the left-wing National Guardian, with five major articles, and 
LF. Stone’s Weekly provided the most extensive, careful, and accurate 
account of the events. In contrast to the fevered rhetoric of the main¬ 
stream newsweeklies, the National Guardian simply described the 
facts that were available, asking whether the August 2 “skirmish” had 
been provoked and whether the “alleged” August 4 incident had 
taken place. The relevant background and Communist versions were 
accurately presented, with appropriate questions raised. Wayne 
Morse’s commentary was given ample coverage, as were South Viet¬ 
namese General Ky 5 s statements on sabotage missions in North Viet¬ 
nam. LF. Stone’s Weekly also reported the facts accurately, adding 
relevant background ignored by the major media, 102 

In summary, the national media, overcome by jingoist passion, failed 
to provide even minimally adequate coverage of this crucial event, 
although appropriate skepticism would have been aroused in the mind 
of the reader of the foreign or “alternative” media, or the reader with 
the sophistication to treat the media as a disinformation system disguis¬ 
ing a reality that can perhaps be ascertained with sufficient energy and 
dedication. The Pentagon Papers analyst describes these events as “an 
important firebreak,” noting that “the Tonkin Gulf Resolution set U.S. 
public support for virtually any action.” 103 

The willingness of the media to serve as a vehicle for government 
propaganda helped impel the country toward what they were later to 
regard as “the tragedy” of Vietnam, The reaction of Congress and the 



210 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


public laid the basis for the outright invasion of early 1965, providing 
support for the planners who were secretly concerned that the NLF was 
continuing “to seek a political settlement favorable to the communists 51 
