MIG ploy. The media also allowed major lies to be institutionalized— 
for example, that coercion was greater and pluralistic choices less in the 
Nicaraguan than in the Salvadoran and Guatemalan elections, and that 



140 manufacturing consent 


the latter were legitimizing in a substantive sense, in contrast with 
Nicaragua, 

These propaganda lies could not have been perpetrated if such re¬ 
ports as those of the Irish delegation and LASA had been accorded 
proper weight, LASA actually contacted the major mass-media outlets 
and tried to interest them in doing a story on their report. LASA was 
turned down by eveiy major outlet. The LASA report is probably the 
best-documented and most closely reasoned observer report ever writ¬ 
ten. Its authors are far and away the most qualified group ever to write 
such a report, half with field experience in Nicaragua, and the docu¬ 
ment was an official report of the major scholarly organization that 
deals with Central America. The authors represent a variety of opin¬ 
ions, on balance liberal but revealing a strong critical capability (and 
in no sense biased, as are the official observer teams to whom the media 
accord much attention). Their report covers every issue of importance 
and openly confronts and weighs evidence. If one reads the LASA 
report, and then the accounts of the Nicaraguan election in Time, 
Newsweek, and the New York Times, it is not so much the difference in 
conclusions that is striking but the difference in depth, balance, and 
objectivity. LASA offers serious history and context, a full account of 
the organization of the election, and a full discussion of each relevant 
issue with comparisons to other elections. We believe that an important 
reason the mass media failed to use LASA as a source of information 
was that its report contradicts in every way the propaganda claims 
which the media were disseminating daily and uncritically. Thus its 
very credibility, objectivity, and quality were disturbing, and neces¬ 
sitated that it be bypassed by institutions serving a propaganda func¬ 
tion. 


3.10* CONCLUDING NOTE 

As we have seen, electoral conditions in Nicaragua in 1984 were far 
more favorable than in El Salvador and Guatemala, and the observer 
team of LASA found the election in Nicaragua to have been “a model 
of probity and fairness” by Latin American standards. 111 In El Salvador 
and Guatemala, none of the five basic preconditions of a free election 
was met. In both of these countries, state-sponsored terror, including 
the public exposure of mutilated bodies, had ravaged the civilian popu¬ 
lation up to the very day of the elections. In both, voting was required 
by law, and the populace was obliged to have ID cards signed, testifying 





142 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


As we stressed earlier, the media’s adherence to the state propaganda 
line is extremely functional. Just as the government of Guatemala could 
kill scores of thousands without major repercussion because the media 
recognized that these were “unworthy” victims, so today aid to state 
terrorists in HI Salvador and Guatemala, and the funding of contra 
attacks on “soft targets” in Nicaragua, depend heavily on continued 
media recognition of “worth” and an appropriate legitimization and 
delegitimization. As their government sponsors terror in all three states 
(as well as in Honduras), we may fairly say that the U.S. mass media, 
despite their righteous self-image as opponents of something called 
terrorism, serve in fact as loyal agents of terrorism. 



£ 



The KGB-Bulgarian 
Plot to Kill 
the Pope: 

Free-Market Disinformation 
as “News” 


In the case of the Salvadoran, Guatemalan, and nicarag- 
uan elections* the government was the moving force in providing the 
suitable frames of analysis and relevant facts* with the mass media’s role 
mainly that of channeling information and assuring that the govern¬ 
ment’s agenda was not seriously challenged. With the shooting of the 
pope* in May 1981, and the eventual charges of a KGB-Bulgarian plot* 
the mass media played a much larger role in originating the claims and 
in keeping the pot boiling from inception to conclusion of the case. 1 

In many ways* however* the process was similar. A dominant frame 
was eventually produced that interpreted the shooting of the pope in 
a manner especially helpful to then-current elite demands. A campaign 
quickly ensued in which the serviceable propaganda line was instilled 
in the public mind by repetition. Alternative frames were ignored, and 
sources inclined toward other ways of looking at the issue were ex¬ 
