the communists had in achieving them. 55 They “failed 55 in many of their aims, 
but in a third phase the enemy might “recoup there what he lost in the first 
two phases. 55 In what he calls a “speculative, personal, subjective 55 judgment, 
Cronkite states that he is “not sure . . . who won and who lost, 55 or to what 
extent. He concludes that the United States is probably “mired in stalemate, 55 
and that historians may conclude that the Tet battle was “a draw 55 ; “To suggest 
we are on the edge of defeat is to yield to unreasonable pessimism. 55 He does 
not say that Johnson will be “forced 55 to the negotiating table by a “defeat, 55 
but rather that if indeed there is a “stalemate, 55 then “the only rational way 
out then will be to negotiate, not as victors, but as an honorable people who 
lived up to their pledge to defend democracy, and did the best they could. 55 
Note the typical reiteration of government propaganda concerning American 
aims, unsullied by the factual record—enormous in scale, by this time—of U.S. 
government efforts to undermine democracy and to destroy all popular 
forces—the NLF, the Buddhist “third force, 55 etc.—in South Vietnam, on the 
assumption, openly admitted, that the forces placed in power by U.S. violence 
could not survive political competition. Recall also that in these comments that 
Freedom House derides, Cronkite reaches essentially the same conclusion as 
did the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Wheeler, in his summary 
to the president on the same day as Cronkite’s broadcast, and the president’s 
advisers a month later. 

We may note also that two weeks earlier, Cronkite had “assessed 55 the 
impact of the Communist offensive, on the basis of U.S. and Vietnamese 
sources, reporting that “first, and simplest, the Vietcong suffered a military 
defeat” ( 1 ,158). Similarly, on an NBC-TV special of March 10 that Braestrup 
repeatedly condemns, Howard Tuckner stated that “Militarily the allies won 55 
(I, 159), as did others repeatedly. 

Cronkite’s “special” is exhibit A in the Freedom House indictment. The 
example is typical of the relation between their conclusions and the evidence 
they cite. 


Braestrup refers to a television comment by Robert Schakne on February 
28 for which he gives the following paraphrase: “In short, the United States 
would now have to take over the whole war, including the permanently dam¬ 
aged pacification program, because of Saigon’s failures” ( 1 ,562-63). Braestrup 
claims further that Schackne attributed “this argument” to Robert Komer. 
This he calls “a CBS exclusive,” his standard term of derision. In fact, “this 
argument” is yet another “Freedom House exclusive.” What Schackne said, 
according to Braestrup, is that it was “likely” that Komer was in Washington 
with General Wheeler to ask for more troops “to help get the Vietnam pacifi¬ 
cation program back on the road.” The preceding day, Wheeler had requested 
that the troop level be raised from 525,000 to 731,756, one primary concern 
being that “There is no doubt that the RD Program [pacification] has suffered 
a severe set back,” that “To a large extent the VC now control the country¬ 
side,” and that “US forces will be required in a number of places to assist and 
encourage the Vietnamese Army to leave the cities and towns and reenter the 
country.” 1 While Braestrup’s version of Schackne’s “argument” has little re¬ 
semblance to the actual words he attributes to Schackne, these words were, 
if anything, understated. 

Braestrup then goes on to claim that Cronkite “used the same argument 
almost verbatim, but with an even stronger conclusion” in a February 28 radio 
broadcast. There is no hint in the actual broadcast of Braestrup’s “argument.” 
The closest Cronkite came to this “argument” is his statement that “presuma¬ 
bly, Ambassador Komer told a sad tale to President Johnson” (Braestrup’s empha¬ 
sis). Cronkite then repeated accurately the basic facts presented by Komer in 
a briefing four days earlier. He concluded that “it seems likely that today 
Ambassador Komer asked President Johnson for more American troops so that 
we can permanently occupy the hamlets and fulfill the promise of security [«c] 
to their residents, a promise the Vietnamese alone apparently cannot honor,” 
the NLF not being Vietnamese, as usual. Apart from the tacit assumption of 
the propaganda system that the villagers yearn for the fulfillment of this 
“promise of security” from the NLF, Cronkite’s speculation that U.S. troops 
would have to fulfill a promise that ARVN alone apparently could not honor 
hardly seems unreasonable, three days after General Westmoreland had stated 
that “additional U.S. forces would probably be required” (II, 159), and that 
with them “we could more effectively deny the enemy his objectives”; four 
days after Komer had described the Tet offensive as a “considerable setback” 
to pacification; a day after Cronkite had presented a television interview with 
Captain Donald Jones, deputy pacification adviser for the district regarded as 
“the bowl of pacification,” who said that “for most of the District, pacification 
does not exist,” and travel there is impossible (CBS-TV “special” of February 
27, cited above); and one day after General Wheeler had asked for a huge troop 
increase justified in part by the need to overcome the fact that “To a large 
extent the VC now control the countryside.” 

Television and radio are not alone in being subjected to “Freedom House 
exclusives.” Here are a few examples. 

Exuding contempt and derision, the study informs us that “no one” except 
for George McArthur (AP) and Don Oberdorfer (Knight) “reported ... on 
what happened to Hue’s civilians under Vietcong rule” ( 1 ,299). Again demon- 




strating his considerable gift for self-refutation, Braestrup cites reports on 
Vietcong executions, kidnappings, burial of executed civilians in mass graves, 
etc., in Hue under Viet Cong rule by Newsweek, UPI, Washington Post, William 
Ryan, Reuters, New York Times, Time, London Times, and the NBC “Today” 
show ( 1 ,277, 281-84,472). On page 283, Braestrup writes that “The television 
networks, as far as our records show, made no mention of the executions at 
all”; on page 472, he refutes this claim, noting that on February 28, in an 
“aftermath film report from Hue ... at battle’s end,” the NBC “Today” show 
“hinted at the Hue massacre with this statement: ‘Hundreds of government 
workers were killed and thrown into temporary graves.’ ” A rather broad 
“hint,” it would seem. The example is typical of the Freedom House style of 
