the client regime that we established) lost the war to North Vietnam— 
the official enemy* since the U.S. attack against the South cannot be 
conceded* “North Vietnam, not the Vietcong, was always the enemy,” 
John Corry proclaims in reporting the basic message of an NBC white 
paper on the war* 167 a stance that is conventional in the mainstream. 
Corry is indignant that anyone should question this higher truth* As 



242 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


proof of the absurdity of such “liberal mythology/' he cites the battle 
of la Drang Valley in November 1965: 

It was clear then that North Vietnam was in the war* Nonetheless, 
liberal mythology insisted that the war was being waged only by 
the Vietcong, mostly righteous peasants, 

Corry presents no example of liberals who described the Viet Cong as 
“righteous peasants/' there being none, and no example of anyone who 
denied that North Vietnamese troops had entered the South by No¬ 
vember 1965, since, again* there were none. Furthermore* opponents of 
the war at that time and for several years after included few representa¬ 
tives of mainstream liberalism. Corry’s argument for North Vietnamese 
aggression, however* is as impressive as any that have been presented. 

The NBC white paper was one of a rash of retrospectives on the 
tenth anniversary of the war's end, devoted to “The War that Went 
Wrong, The Lessons It Taught/' 168 These retrospective assessments 
provide considerable insight into the prevailing intellectual culture. 
Their most striking feature is what is missing: the American wars in 
Indochina. It is a classic example of Hamlet without the Prince of 
Denmark. Apart from a few scattered sentences, the rare allusions to 
the war in these lengthy presentations—as in postwar commentary 
rather generally, including cinema and literature as well as the media— 
are devoted to the suffering of the American invaders. The Wall Street 
Journal, for example, refers to “the $180 million in chemical companies' 
compensation to Agent Orange victims”—U.S. soldiers, not the South 
Vietnamese victims whose suffering was and remains vastly greater. 169 
It is difficult to exaggerate the significance of these startling facts. 

There is an occasional glimpse of reality. Time opens its inquiry by 
recalling the trauma of the American soldiers, facing an enemy that 

dissolved by day into the villages, into the other Vietnamese. They 
maddened the Americans with the mystery of who they were—the 
unseen man who shot from the tree line, or laid a wire across the 
trail with a Claymore mine at the other end, the mama-san who 
did the wash, the child concealing a grenade. 

No doubt one could find similar complaints in the Nazi press about the 
Balkans. 

The meaning of these facts is almost never perceived. Time goes so 
far as to claim that the “subversion” was “orchestrated” by Moscow, 
so that the United States had to send troops to “defend” South Viet- 





THE INDOCHINA WARS (l): VIETNAM 243 


nam, echoing the fantasies concocted in scholarship—for example, by 
Walt Rostow, who maintains that in his effort “to gain the balance of 
power in Eurasia,” Stalin turned “to the East, to back Mao and to 
enflame the North Korean and Indochinese Communists.” 170 

Throughout the war, elite groups remained loyal to the cause, apart 
from expressing qualms about the bombing of North Vietnam, which 
was regarded as problematic since it might lead to a broader conflict* 
drawing in China and the USSR, from which the United States might 
not be immune. This was the “toughest” question, according to the 
McNamara memo cited earlier, and the only serious question among 
“respectable” critics of the war. The massacre of innocents is a problem 
only among emotional or irresponsible types, or among the “aging 
adolescents on college faculties who found it rejuvenating to play ‘revo¬ 
lution/ ” 171 Decent and respectable people remain silent and obedient, 
devoting themselves to personal gain, concerned only that we too might 
ultimately face unacceptable threat—a stance not without historical 
precedent. In contrast to the war protestors, two commentators explain, 
“decent, patriotic Americans demanded—and in the person of Ronald 
Reagan have apparently achieved—a return to pride and patriotism, a 
reaffirmation of the values and virtues that had been trampled upon by 
the Vietnam-spawned counterculture” 172 —most crucially, the virtues 
of marching in parades chanting praises for their leaders as they con¬ 
duct their necessary chores, as in Indochina and El Salvador, 

The extent of this servility is revealed throughout the tenth-anniver¬ 
sary retrospectives, not only by the omission of the war itself but also 
by the interpretation provided. The New York Times writes sardonically 
of the “ignorance” of the American people* only 60 percent of whom 
are aware that the United States “sided with South Vietnam”—as Nazi 
Germany sided with France, as the USSR now sides with Afghanistan. 
Given that we were engaged in “a defense of freedom” in South Viet¬ 
nam (Charles Krauthammer), it must be that the critics of this noble 
if flawed enterprise sided with Hanoi, and that is indeed what standard 
doctrine maintains; the fact that opposition to American aggression in 
