
3.2.3. Freedom of organization of 
intermediate groups* 

Perhaps the most important fact about El Salvador in the two years 
prior to the election of March 1982 was the decimation of popular and 
private organizations that could pose any kind of challenge to the army 
and oligarchy. As we noted in chapter 2* this was the main thrust of 
policy of the revolutionary junta from late 1979 onward, and thousands 
of leaders were murdered and numerous organizations were destroyed 
or driven underground. The teachers 5 union was decimated by several 
hundred murders; the university was occupied* looted, and closed down 
by the army; organized student and professional groups were destroyed 
by arrests and killings, and even the peasant union sponsored by the 
AFL-CIO (i.e., supporters of the regime) had some one hundred of its 
organizers and leaders murdered between October 1979 and the elec¬ 
tion of March 1982. 34 

In Guatemala, too, intermediate organizations such as peasant and 
trade unions, teacher and student groups, and professional organiza¬ 
tions have been regularly attacked by the armed forces since 1954- The 
process of demobilization of institutions threatening the dominant 
elites culminated in the early 1980s, when by government proclamation 
“illicit association 55 was made punishable by law. All groups “which 
follow, or are subordinated to, any totalitarian system of ideology” 
(evidently an exception is made of the Guatemalan armed forces and 
the national-security ideology) are illicit. Only the armed forces deter¬ 
mine when illicitness occurs. If General Mejia Victores finds the GAM 
mothers to be agents of subversion, they may be killed (see chapter 2). 
Unions, peasant groups, student and professional organizations have 
grown up periodically in Guatemala, only to be crushed by systematic 
murder as soon as their demands were pressed with any vigor. The 
1984-85 elections followed the greatest era of mass murder in modem 
Guatemalan history—under the regimes of Lucas Garcia, Rios Montt, 
and Mejia Victores. Union membership in 1985 was below its 1950 level, 
and other urban groups were decimated or inactive; the peasant major¬ 
ity was totally demobilized and under the tight control and surveillance 
of the military. 



TOO MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


In Nicaragua, again the contrast with the two U.S. clients is marked. 
Under Sandinista management there was a spurt in union and peasant 
organization. A deliberate attempt was made to mobilize the population 
to participate in decision-making at the local level and to interact with 
higher-level leaders, Oxfam compliments the Nicaraguan government 
highly for this effort, as we pointed out earlier. 
