South Vietnam, Central America, and many other places. Since these 
are the conclusions drawn from “almost every conversation with a 
Cambodian, 55 they are surely realistic, at least as long as we understand 



276 manufacturing consent 


that “Cambodians” are those Cambodians who are not “the enemy” of 
the objective press, just as “South Vietnamese” were South Vietnamese 
collaborating with the U,S. aggressors. 

The framework is the usual one, although perhaps a shade more 
egregious in the light of what might have been passing through the 
minds of those Cambodians who were not “Cambodians” during phase 
I of the genocide. 

About that topic, we learn very little from the media. The refugees 
flooding Phnom Penh and other areas where U.S. reporters traveled 
were virtually ignored. To gain a measure of this remarkable fact, let 
us review the reports during these months in the New York Times, most 
of them by its Pulitzer Prize-winning correspondent Sydney Schan¬ 
berg, who, more than any other U.S. reporter, came to be regarded as 
the conscience of the media with regard to Cambodia. 

Schanberg arrived in Phnom Penh in May 1973, at the height of the 
intensified bombing, which continued until the mid-August halt. Dur¬ 
ing this period, the Times published twenty-seven of his reports from 
Cambodia, many of them long and detailed, along with a column in 
which he expressed his contempt for the “so-called international press 
corps” who spend their time “interviewing each other” in the Hotel Le 
Phnom. 67 

From the outset, Schanberg reports “refugees pouring into the city,” 
but there are no interviews with refugees who relate the circumstances 
of life under the bombs. We hear a “well to do Cambodian woman” who 
tells us that “The bombing is terrible”; she is “not frightened, just 
annoyed—because it wakes my baby up every night in the middle of 
the night, and I have to get up” (May 3), But those villagers who want 
to be left alone are not granted the opportunity to relay their accounts 
of somewhat more serious concerns, apart from a few scattered phrases, 
and there is not a word to suggest that refugees might have had any 
attitude, apart from fear, with regard to those “determined” fighters 
who “believe they can change their environment,” although plainly 
they had a solid base in the peasant society that was being torn to shreds 
by saturation bombing. As in Laos a few years earlier, the refugees 
simply had the wrong tale to tell, and the kinds of stories that readily 
flow if one is sufficiently interested to inquire are lacking here. 

Running through the columns seriatim for relevant material, number 
5 (May 11) quotes a Western European diplomat who says that “Ameri¬ 
can men in American planes are bombing the hell out of this place,” 
and notes that the U.S. aircraft “do not always receive accurate an¬ 
swers” about civilians in the targeted areas “from the Cambodian com¬ 
manders” who direct the jet fighter-bombers. The Cambodians, then. 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (ll)l LAOS AND CAMBODIA 277 


are to blame for the civilian casualties that must result* although “no 
reliable figures are available” and refugees are not asked to supplement 
with their personal knowledge* The next two columns (May 24, 27) are 
the only ones concerned directly with the effect of the bombing in the 
countryside- The first reports “extensive” destruction from bombing 
that has wiped out “a whole series of villages” along the main highway, 
with often not even a piece of a house left standing for miles, while “a 
few people wander forlornly through the rubble, stunned by what has 
happened, skirting the craters, picking at the debris.” A group of villag¬ 
ers from Svay Rieng Province, abutting Vietnam, report the destruction 
of seven villages, with many killed, “The frightened villagers uprooted 
by the bombing have a great deal to say,” Schanberg comments, but we 
do not read it here. Rather, he explains that “There is no doubt that 
the Seventh Air Force is making a marked effort to avoid civilian 
casualties—at least outside the eastern third of the country, which is 
solidly held by the enemy”; and if there are casualties it is the fault of 
Cambodian military officials who request air strikes with “almost no 
concern about civilian lives or property.” The second column informs 
us that “the refugees frequently tell about the bombing,” which has 
destroyed villages and “terrified all the rest of the villagers,” a Western 
diplomat reports. But the refugees are granted only two phrases, an 
“incongruously polite” request that “I would be very glad if the Gov¬ 
ernment would stop sending the planes to bomb,” and a plea from a 
monk to ask the United States and other governments: “Don’t destroy 
everything in Cambodia.” 

We hear no more from the refugees until column 15 (July 26), a 
graphic account of “a terror attack on the civilian population”—by 
Communist forces who shelled the outskirts of Phnom Penh. A weeping 
child describes how her little brother's hand was cut off, and the blood¬ 
stained road and doorsteps testify to Communist barbarity, as distinct 
from the operations of the scrupulous American command* Column 19 
(Aug. 5) tells of thousands of new refugees “fleeing from enemy as¬ 
saults,” and column 21 (Aug. 7) describes Cambodian soldiers looting 
a recaptured village that “looked as if struck by a storm with a tongue 
of fire,” with many houses “smashed in by shells,” but no word from 
the victims, who had fled. Then follow three columns (Aug* 7, 9, 12) 
describing in extensive detail the bombing of the village of Neak 
