demands for justice. To this day one will find no mention of the fact 


m 



58 manufacturing consent 


that the effective rulers of this "fledgling democracy” are military of¬ 
ficers who were closely associated with D’Aubuisson and his cabal and 
may well have been implicated in the assassination. 

After D J Aubuisson was caught in a raid on May 8*1980, with docu¬ 
ments showing that he was planning a coup and with evidence of his 
involvement in the murder of Romero, he was arrested and faced with 
the threat of trial and imprisonment. An assembly of the entire officer 
corps of the Salvadoran army—seven hundred strong—was quickly 
convened* and demanded his release. He was turned loose shortly 
thereafter* with the concurrence of the minister of defense, 46 The 
documents found in his possession dropped out of sight. The security 
forces also raided the legal-aid office of the archbishopric* removing all 
of their files bearing on the assassination. At the previously mentioned 
meeting of the Salvadoran officer corps* Colonel Adolfo Majano, the 
last of the reformers in the "reformist” junta of 1979* was denounced, 
and he quickly exited from the junta, to be replaced by yet another 
hard-liner. The army had expressed its solidarity with the hard-line- 
death-squad right, and the junta was adjusted to meet this new threat 
to the image of a reformist junta* with Duarte advanced to president* 
serving as a figurehead for the benefit of Congress and the media* to 
ensure that arms would flow to the killers. 

The U.S. mass media gave little notice to this important display and 
consolidation of the power of the extreme right* and the semi-official 
vindication of the murderers of Archbishop Romero, This was telling 
evidence about the nature of power in El Salvador and the fictional 
quality of the claim that the government was centrist or reformist. 
Unbiased media would have featured and explained the meaning of this 
information- But these facts contradicted the Carter-Reagan mythol- 
ogy* so the media predictably remained silent about these events and 
continued to perpetuate the myth. On November 29* 1980* following the 
massacre of the leaders of the opposition in San Salvador* the Times 
suggested that there is "a severe challenge to the credibility” of the gov¬ 
ernment, but there is no hint that the revolt of May 1980 had changed 
their view of April 28 that this was a "weak centrist government.” 

The media also adjusted nicely* then and later* to the rehabilitation 
of the probable murderer of Romero and his reintegration into the 
official power structure. As D’Aubuisson sought high office and eventu¬ 
