nal Court of Rome handed down a Judgment in the Matter of Francesco 
Pazienza et ah , which described repeated corrupt behavior by officials 
of the Italian secret-service agency SISMI, including the forgery and 
planting of documents. These officials were also charged with involve¬ 
ment in a cover-up of the agents carrying out the 1980 Bologna railway- 
station massacre, the kind of terrorist connection that attracts frenetic 
mass-media attention when attributable to suitable villains. As we noted 
earlier, SISMI officials had visited Agca in prison and SISMI had 
issued a forged document implicating the Soviet Union in the shooting 
of the pope on May 19, 1981, only six days after the assassination 
attempt. This forgery was never mentioned in the TimeSy Time, and 
Newsweek, or on CBS News, and the July 1985 court decision was barely 
mentioned in a back-page article of the Times. 

These blackouts are of materials that suggest a corrupt Italian pro¬ 
cess and the possibility that Agca was persuaded and coached to pin the 
plot on the East A propaganda system exploiting the alleged Bulgarian 
Connection will naturally avoid such documents. 

Agca’s extremely loose prison conditions and the numerous claims 
in the Italian and dissident U.S, press of visits by Italian intelligence 
personnel were also virtually unmentioned by the U.S. mass media 
throughout 1982 and 1983. In June 1983, Diana Johnstone, the foreign 
editor of the newspaper In These Times submitted on Op-Ed column 
to the New York Times and the Philadelphia Inquirer that summarized 
the evidence and claims of intelligence-agency visits, the reported 
threats to Agca that his open and pleasant prison conditions might be 
terminated if he remained uncooperative, and Martella’s proposed deal 
with Agca, This Op-Ed offering was rejected, and no commentary or 
news along these lines was permitted to surface in the Times or the 
Philadelphia Inquirer —or elsewhere, to our knowledge. Several years 
later, in an article in the New York Times of June 17,1985, referring to 
Pandico’s detailed description of how Agca was coached in prison, John 
Tagliabue describes Agca’s prison as “notoriously porous,” But the 
Times had never mentioned this notorious fact before, or considered it 
in any way relevant to the case. 

When Agca identified the Bulgarians in November 1982, the integrity 
of the Italian investigative-judicial process in pursuing the case was 
already badly compromised for a wide variety of reasons, 46 but the U.S. 
mass media weren’t interested. Nor were they interested in the strange 




THE KGB-BULGARIAN PLOT TO KILL THE POPE 16 $ 


circumstances of the famous Antonov photo, widely circulated in the 
Western press, which shows Antonov very clearly and in a remarkable 
likeness watching the scene at St, Peter’s Square on May 13,1981, This 
photo, Martella eventually claimed, was not of Antonov but an Ameri¬ 
can tourist. But this tourist, who apparently looked exactly like An¬ 
tonov, has never been located, and the film from which this shot was 
taken has unaccountably disappeared, 47 Agca’s alterations in his claims 
about the Bulgarians, with Martella generously allowing him to change 
his recollections about the timing of events on May 13 whenever Bul¬ 
garian counter-evidence was too strong, failed to attract the media’s 
attention, 48 Agca’s June 28, 1983, retraction of his claim that he had 
visited Antonov’s apartment and met his family was not mentioned in 
the mass media until a full year after the event, and even then suggested 
to the press no very serious problems with the case or with Martella’s 
investigative work. 4 * How could Agca know details about Antonov’s 
apartment if he had never been there? An honest press would have 
pursued this relentlessly. The New York Times, with Sterling as its 
reporter, suppressed the issue. 50 The rest of the press simply wasn’t 
interested. 

The media also weren’t interested in Or sen Oy men’s finding that the 
Vatican had gone to some pains to try to implicate the Bulgarians, or 
the trial disclosure that the West German authorities had tried to bribe 
Gray Wolves member Oral Celik to come to West Germany and con¬ 
firm Agca’s claims, Pandico’s and Pazienza’s insider claims of Mafia and 
SISMI involvement in getting Agca to talk were also given only the 
slightest attention, and this accumulating mass of materials on the 
Italian process was never brought together for a reassessment. 

Perhaps the most blatant case of willful ignorance concerned the 
Italian fixer and former member of SISMI, Francesco Pazienza. 
Wanted for several crimes, Pazienza had fled Italy, and in 1985 he 
resided in exile in New York City, Eventually he was seized and held 
there by the Immigration and Naturalization Service. Pazienza had 
been a partner of Michael Ledeen in the “Billygate” affair in Italy, and 
retained his connection after Ledeen became General Haig’s right- 
hand man in Italy in the early days of the Reagan presidency, Pazienza 
had also been a close associate of SISMI head Giuseppe Santovito. 
From 1983 onward it was alleged in the Italian press that Pazienza had 
been involved in getting Agca to talk, and he himself eventually made 
detailed accusations of coaching by elements of SISMI, Although Pa¬ 
zienza was readily available for interviews in a New York City jail, the 
New York Times ignored him. Our hypothesis is that they did this 
because if they had talked to him it would have been difficult to avoid 


l66 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


discussing his connections with Ledeen and Sterling (both Times 
sources and under Times protection). This would not have reflected 
well on the quality of the paper’s sourcing. Pazienza’s story would also 
