is “between North and South Vietnam.” The core provision of the Paris 
Agreements establishes the GVN and the PRG as “the two South 




THE INDOCHINA WARS fl): VIETNAM 233 


Vietnamese parties,” parallel and equivalent* to move toward unifica¬ 
tion with the North, abrogating the provisional demarcation line, which 
has no political status. Kissinger was attempting to confuse “sove¬ 
reignty of South Vietnam” with “sovereignty within South Vietnam”; 
the latter is what the war “was all about” from the outset, and the 
agreements simply reiterated the position of “the enemy* 5 that this was 
a matter to be settled by the two South Vietnamese parties without 
external interference, as in the October 9-Point Plan. 144 

Just as in October, the purpose of this obfuscation was, in Nixon*s 
words, “to make sure that our version of the agreement was the one that 
had great public impact.” And again it succeeded. The media—without 
exception, to our knowledge—accepted the Kissinger-White House 
version as expressing the contents of the agreements, enabling them to 
interpret the PRG-DRV insistence on the actual terms of the Paris 
Agreements as an effort to disrupt them. Thus Joseph Kraft, a liberal 
dove on these issues, wrote that “Much of the blame goes to the 
Communists 55 for the subsequent breakdown of the cease-fire, because 
“Hanoi has never abandoned the objective of unifying all of Vietnam”; 
that is, Hanoi has never abandoned its objective of living up to the 
terms of the Geneva Accords of 1954, now explicitly reiterated in the 
Paris Agreements of January 1973. 145 As a dove, he also added that “just 
as much of the blame goes to President Thieu”—but none, of course, 
can be assigned to Washington, He cites Communist military actions 
in the South and dispatch of equipment as the major reason for the 
breakdown of the cease-fire, citing no evidence; as we shall see, the 
facts reveal quite a different reason. 

At the liberal extreme of U.S. opinion, Tom Wicker wrote that 

American policy, which never accepted the Geneva agreement, 
came to insist, instead, that South Vietnam was a legally con¬ 
stituted nation being subverted and invaded by another power; 
and that view is implied even in the documents that finally pro¬ 
duced the cease-fire. 14 * 

Wicker adopts Kissinger's version, which is in explicit contradiction to 
the actual documents; these simply reiterate the long-held position of 
the NLF and Hanoi with regard to the status of South Vietnam. 

In the New Republic, Stanley Karnow wrote that “the Vietcong 
