
60. John Dinges, “Evidence Indicates Military Planned Missionaries , 
Deaths,” National Catholic Reporter , July 17, 1981. 

61. Stephen Kinzer, “Ex-Aide in Salvador Accuses Colleagues on Death 
Squads,” March 3,1984. Note the “soft” headline. An option forgone by the 
Times was a headline like: “Duarte and Defense Minister Casanova Accused 
of Cover-up of Murder of Four American Women.” Santivanez was paid 
$50,000 to give his evidence, a sum he requested on the ground of the risk he 
was taking and the probability that he would be income-short in the future as 
a result of his confession. This payment was given unusual publicity as sug¬ 
gesting a compromising quality to his testimony, and the New York Times 
squelched a second installment of his evidence on this principled ground— 
which they never apply to Soviet defectors, who are less in need of protection. 
The revelation that the “leading democrats” who were formed into a civilian 
front for the contras by the CIA have been receiving over $80,000, tax-free, 
annually from the CIA for years has never compromised their integrity as 
media sources. Nicaraguan defector Miranda got $800,000 for his services 
without being discredited. 

62. Excellent accounts were produced by Michael Posner and the Lawyers’ 
Committee for International Human Rights in a series of investigatory reports, 
dated September 1981, July 20, 1982, and February 1, 1983, which contain 
detailed and crushing evidence of a completely broken-down judicial process 
and an official cover-up. Once again, as with the Dinges report, these docu¬ 
ments were essentially ignored in the U.S. mass media and their facts and leads 
suppressed. News coverage of the lawyers’ committee documents was negligi¬ 
ble. Michael Posner and Scott Greathead did succeed in placing an Op-Ed 
article in the Times on December 6,1983, entitled “3 Years after Killings, No 
Justice in Salvador.” 

63. Both Time and Newsweek had articles featuring stonewalling in February 
1981— Time 's article was entitled “Stonewalling” (Feb. 23)—but although the 
stonewalling continued for years, this was the end of the news magazines’ 
interest in the matter. 

64. Lawyers’ Committee for International Human Rights, Update: Justice in El 
Salvador: A Case Study, February 1, 1983, p. 17. 

65. Bonner, Weakness and Deceit, p. 80. 

66. Larry Rohter, “Salvador Defense Lawyer Charges Cover-Up in Slaying of 
U.S. Nuns,” New York Times, May 6, 1985. 

67. In the same month that Hinton was asserting with assurance that the 
low-level guardsmen were acting on their own, internal State Department 
memos were stating that “Reading the documents provoked several questions 
which we think should have occurred to an investigator whose real aim was 
to determine who committed the crime” (quoted in Update, p. 31). 

