and brought to justice. The New York Times had no editorial condemn¬ 
ing* or even mentioning* the murder. It was quickly placed in the larger 
framework of alleged killings by both the left and the right that were 
deeply regretted by Salvadoran and US. officials. 



WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS 49 


2.3.2. The propaganda line: a 
reformist junta trying to contain 
the violence of right and left 

The Salvadoran and U,S. governments contended at the time of 
Romero’s murder that the killing going on in El Salvador was being 
done by extremists of the right and the left, not by the Salvadoran 
armed forces and their agents; and that the government was trying its 
best to contain the killings and carry out reforms. John Bushnell, of the 
State Department* stated before a House appropriations committee 
that “there is some misperception by those who follow the press that 
the government is itself repressive in El Salvador*” when in fact the 
violence is “from the extreme right and the extreme left” and “the 
smallest part” of the killings come from the army and security forces* 17 
This statement was a knowing lie, 18 contradicted by all independent 
evidence coming out of El Salvador and refuted by Archbishop Romero 
on an almost daily basis. 19 In his letter to Carter sent on February 17, 
1980* the archbishop pointed out that aid to the junta had resulted in 
increasing repressive violence by the government, “amassing a total 
dead and wounded far higher than in the previous military regimes,” 
And Romero explained to Carter that the idea that the junta was 
reformist was a myth, that “neither the junta nor the Christian Demo¬ 
crats govern the country,” but, rather, power is in the hands of the 
army, serving itself and the oligarchy. 20 

What gave Bushnell’s statement a certain credibility was the fact that 
there had been a “reformist coup” by young army officers in October 
1979, an d liberals and progressives entered the early junta. However, as 
Raymond Bonner points out. 

The young, progressive officers who carefully plotted the coup 
lost control of it as swiftly as they had executed it. Their ideals 
and objectives were subverted by senior, more conservative of¬ 
ficers who had the backing of [ITS. Ambassador) Devine and the 
U.S. Embassy in El Salvador and key Carter administration offi¬ 
cials in Washington. 21 

The progressive elements on the junta found themselves entirely with¬ 
out power, and gradually exited or were forced out, along with large 
numbers from the cabinet and administration. Jose Napoleon Duane 
joined the junta in March to serve as a fig leaf and public-relations 
agent of the army, but all those who were not satisfied to serve in that 
role depaned. 22 





50 manufacturing CONSENT 


Once the old-guard military had seized control from the progressive 
officers in October 1979, it began a general war of extermination against 
all progressive individuals and organizations in El Salvador. By the end 
of May, church sources reported 1,844 civilian deaths already in 1980, 
a figure that reached 10,000 by the end of the year, almost all at the 
hands of the government. A guerrilla war was forced on the center and 
left by the policy of unconstrained violence of the Carter-supported 
government. The government was not centrist and reformist—it was a 
military regime of the right, closely linked to the terrorist force 
ORDEN and the death squads, and it used them regularly as proxies. 
The paramilitary groups were not uncontrollable—they were doing 
what the army wanted them to do. The paramilitary forces and death 
squads of El Salvador had extensive interlocking relationships with the 
official military and security forces and their U.S. counterparts. There 
was a revolving door of personnel, close cooperation in sharing infor¬ 
mation, funding of the paramilitary groups by the official forces, and 
a division of labor between them. The paramilitary did jobs for which 
the official forces wished to disclaim responsibility. 23 

Although the paramilitary group ORDEN was formally abolished at 
the time of the October 1979 coup, it was secretly maintained and had 
a close relationship with the regular military establishment. According 
to one detailed account. 

The reformers had officially abolished ORDEN, the old informa¬ 
tion network. But . . . military officers suspicious of the young 
reformers secretly reestablished and expanded much of the old 
intelligence system into a grass-roots intelligence network that fed 
names of suspected subversives to military and paramilitary death 
squads. Four days after the coup, D’Aubuisson said in an inter¬ 
view, he was assigned by members of the high command to help 
reorganize ANSESAL [an intelligence communication network] 
inside a military compound under the chief of staffs office—out 
of the reach of civilians in the new junta. 24 

This secret assignment of D’Aubuisson was confirmed by junta member 
Colonel Jaime Abdul Gutierrez, and then Deputy Defense Minister 
Colonel Nicholas Carranza. 25 

