Cruz and the Coordinadora seemed to endorse and promote their 
cause, both within Nicaragua and abroad (p. 18). 


LASA also discusses in some detail the U.S. intervention in the elec¬ 
tion, noting the terrorizing overflights by U.S. planes during the elec¬ 
tion campaign, and considering at some length the U-S. efforts to 
induce the withdrawal of candidates. LASA reported the claims by both 
Liberal and Conservative party figures that the United States offered 
specific and large sums of money to get candidates to withdraw from 
the election. 


3.6*6. The concern over freedom of 
the press and assembly 

Not only the rights of any and all candidates to run for public office, 
but other basic conditions that had been off the agenda in El Salvador 
and Guatemala were of deep concern to the U.S. government and mass 
media in reference to Nicaragua. The New York Times, Time, Newsweek, 
and CBS News all put great stress on the trials and tribulations of La 
Prensa , 106 although during the Salvadoran election none of them had 
even mentioned the destruction by physical violence and murder of La 
Cronica and El Independienze, or the toll of murdered journalists. Mob 
violence allegedly organized by the government, and the threat of the 
neighborhood defense committees, were featured by Time in Nicara¬ 
gua, whereas ORDEN and the death squads in El Salvador and 
Guatemala it had never mentioned as pertinent to election quality, 
Basic conditions of a free election were not only back on the media 
agenda, but there were strong suggestions that Nicaragua was failing 
to meet these conditions . These suggestions were based almost entirely 
on quotes from U.S. officials and Cruz and his allies in Nicaragua. The 
media never gave evidence of having actually looked into these matters 
for themselves or tapped independent sources of evidence. 

Richard Wagner, on CBS News (Nov. 3, 1984), citing as usual Ar¬ 
turo Cruz as the “strongest opposition, 54 also mobilizes a single Nica¬ 
raguan citizen (no doubt selected at random) who says: “How can this 
be free elections [ric] when we don't have freedom of speech, free¬ 
dom of the press?” Wagner says that “In addition to censorship” 
there were food shortages, a deteriorated transportation system, an 



130 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


unpopular draft, and church opposition, so that “it becomes apparent 
why a free and open election is not in the cards.” The cynicism in 
failing to raise the question of why there are food shortages and a 
