not scientifically proven). There has been a consistent sharp difference 
between the results of industry-sponsored science and those of inde¬ 
pendent researchers working the same terrain. 136 And there have been 
numerous cases of fraud in industry testing, industry use of testing labs 
that arranged the data to find industry products acceptable, and political 
manipulation to weaken regulatory standards. 

Despite these industry abuses of science, the media have largely ac¬ 
cepted the industry's claim that it supports “sound science,” in contrast 
with its critics* use of “junk science.” From 1996 through September 
1998, 258 articles in mainstream newspapers used the phrase “junk sci¬ 
ence but only 21, or 8 percent, used it to refer to corporate abuses of 



Xlviii INTRODUCTION! 


science, whereas 160, or 62 percent, applied it to science used by envi¬ 
ronmentalists, other corporate critics, or tort lawyers suing corporations 
( 77 ; or 30 percent, didn’t fit either of these categories ). 138 In short, the 
media have internalized industry's self-legitimizing usage, just as they 
have normalized a status quo of caveat emptor (buyer beware) rather 
than of safety first. 

The media have also regularly gotten on board in dismissing concerns 
about chemical threats as unwarranted “scares,” such as the alleged scares 
over dioxin and the danger of Alar on apples. But these and other scares 
often turn out to be based on genuine health hazards. 13 ^ Meanwhile, the 
media rarely report and examine in any depth the frequent evidence of 
the inadequacy of regulation and testing and of the real costs of chemical¬ 
ization of the environment. 140 For example, the International Joint Com¬ 
mission (IJC), a joint Canadian-U.S. venture dating back to 1978, was 
given the formidable task of trying to halt the flow of toxic chemicals into 
the Great Lakes. It reports each year that it is failing, and since 1992 has 
called for the ending of the manufacture of chlorine as essential to fulfill¬ 
ing its task. The national media virtually ignore this appeal, and the IJC’s 
US. cochairman Gordon Durnil has remarked that “we have a societal 
problem about how to deal with this, but 90 percent of the population 
doesn't even know there is anything to worry about” 141 We believe that 
the propaganda model helps understand this lack of knowledge. 

In the health insurance controversy of 1992-93, the media's refusal 
to take the single-payer option seriously, despite apparent widespread 
public support and the effectiveness of the system in Canada, served well 
the interests of the insurance and medical service complex. 142 The un¬ 
critical media reporting and commentary on the alleged urgency of fiscal 
restraint and a balanced budget in the years 1992-96 fit well the business 
community's desire to reduce the social budget and weaken regula¬ 
tion. 143 The media's gullibility in accepting the claim of a Social Security 
