tirely from the standpoint of U.S. interests, and with official premises 
taken as given. 

Furthermore, the U.S, war was openly supported by U.S. allies, some 
of whom sent combat forces (Australia, Thailand, South Korea), while 
others enriched themselves through their participation in the destruc¬ 
tion of Indochina. For Japan and South Korea, this participation con¬ 
tributed significantly to their “take-off” to the status of major economic 
powers, while Canada and Western Europe also profited from their 
support for the U.S. operations. In contrast to the Soviet invasion of 
Afghanistan, the United Nations never condemned the U.S. “interven¬ 
tion, 55 nor did it investigate or denounce the crimes committed in the 
course of U.S. military operations, a reflection of U.S. world power and 
influence. These facts notwithstanding, it is common practice to de¬ 
nounce the UN and world opinion for its “double standard” in con¬ 
demning the U.S. “intervention 55 in defense of South Vietnam while 
ignoring the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, regularly described as 
“genocidal,” a term never used in the mainstream media with regard 
to the United States in Indochina. 

At the time of the full-scale U.S. invasion of Vietnam, in 1965, when 
there was as yet no debate over the righteousness of the already massive 
“intervention, 55 the United States had not yet succeeded in establishing 
a government able or willing to “invite it in. 55 It appears that the United 
States simply moved in without even the formalities of request or 
acquiescence by a supposedly sovereign government. Nevertheless, at 
the dovish extreme of U.S. journalism, Tom Wicker, explaining his 
view that “the United States has no historic or God-given mission to 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (l): VIETNAM 179 


bring democracy to other nations/ 5 observes that the matter is different 
in the case of the “maintenance of freedom 55 where it already exists: 

U.S. support for a democratic regime that is being attacked or 
subverted by repressive forces of the left or right might well be 
justified if mvited—although, as in Vietnam , the “freedom 55 being 
defended may be minimal and the cost may be astronomical, 27 

As a dissident commentator. Wicker recognizes that the “freedom 55 we 
were defending in Vietnam was minimal and that the cost proved too 
high. But the doctrine that we were “invited in 55 remains sacrosanct, 
and the idea that we were “defending 55 nothing beyond our right to 
impose our will by violence is completely beyond the range of the 
thinkable. We might ask how we would characterize the Soviet media 
if the harshest condemnation of the war in Afghanistan that could be 
expressed in the year 2000 is that Soviet support for the democratic 
