48,500, 97 percent of them South Vietnamese guerrillas (“Viet Cong”). 
A few months after the la Drang Valley battle, in March 1966, the 
Pentagon reported 13,100 North Vietnamese forces in the South, along 
with 225,000 Viet Cong, facing 216,400 U.S. troops and 23,000 third- 
country troops (mostly South Korean), in addition to 690,000 ARVN 
troops. 189 Considering these facts, and the earlier history, it would seem 
possible to imagine a point of view that departs from the framework 
established here, one that is, furthermore, plainly accurate: the United 
States was stepping up its attack against South Vietnam. But that goes 



250 manufacturing consent 


beyond “balance,” which is construed similarly throughout, thus con¬ 
signing the series to the familiar system of state propaganda on the most 
crucial and essential point. A position critical of foreign aggression (that 
is, the U.S, aggression that was plainly the central element of the war) 
is excluded as unthinkable, although it may be conceded that “To the 
Communists in Hanoi, America’s presence in the South was yet another 
act of foreign aggression” (episode 4). The NLF in the South is granted 
no opinion on the matter, and the episode ends with a ringing declara¬ 
tion by LBJ. 190 

It is not that the facts are entirely hidden. Thus episode 5 (“America 
Takes Charge”) opens with a description by a GI of how “the ARVN 
and the VC are the same people, the same race, the same culture, and 
yet one side seems to be chicken and the other side seems to fight in 
the face of overwhelming disadvantages” in what is clearly “their coun¬ 
try.” A U.S. major discusses the problem in Binh Dinh Province, which 
“had never been really in friendly hands” since 1946 but rather “under 
VC control” throughout, compelling the United States to resort to 
“awesome fire power” that turns heavy jungle into a “moonscape.” But 
the plain truth that such facts entail cannot be expressed, or perceived. 

Balance is also preserved in an “account from both sides” of what 
happened in the village of Thuy Bo, in January 1967, where British 
producer Martin Smith had been shown the site of what villagers 
claimed to be a My Lai-style massacre, one of many they alleged, with 
a hundred women and children killed. Fox Butterfield reports that in 
contrast to the “balanced” picture actually presented by PBS, the 
British participants in the series argued that “the Marine attack on 
[Thuy Bo] should be labeled a war crime.” This failure to maintain 
“balance” was in keeping with what a filmmaker involved in the project 
termed their “more moralistic stance, anxious to accentuate the aspects 
of the war that were immoral at the expense of looking at it afresh,” 
which would apparently exclude the “more moralistic stance.” 191 In 
this episode, the marines tell their story of an assault on a VC-defended 
village and then the villagers (given thirty-five lines of the transcript, 
to ninety for the marines) tell their conflicting version of a marine 
massacre of wounded and captured civilians. The sequence ends with 
a marine describing what took place as a “normal procedure,” with 
“burning them hootches down and digging them Vietnamese people out 
of holes [with grenades and rifle fire] and scattering animals, pigs and 
chickens around like we normally do,” especially after three days in the 
field under brutal conditions. 

The account continues in the same vein. We hear that “American 


THE INDOCHINA WARS (l): VIETNAM 25I 


aircraft dropped six times more bombs on South Vietnam than on the 
Communist North,” and that “most of the enemy troops were native 
southerners” (episode 8)* But no conclusion is suggested, except that 
the purpose of the U.S. bombing of Vietnam, distributed in this curious 
manner and at “twice the tonnage dropped on Germany and Japan in 
World War II,” was to try “to stop North Vietnam from sending 
soldiers and supplies to the South.” Nevertheless, 140,000 made it 
through 1967 according to the U.S, government (episode 7), about half 
the number of South Korean mercenaries and a small fraction of the 
Americans who were destroying South Vietnam. 

The Phoenix program of political assassination is justified at length 
by its director, William Colby, who denies that it was what it was, and, 
for balance, some comments are added by critics in the military and by 
a civilian aide worker, describing apparent random killing and torture. 
The post-Tet military operations are passed over in total silence. After 
Nixon's election in 1968, when these wholesale U-S. massacres began 
in full force, “the war continued,” we learn: “The weapons were Viet- 
cong rockets, the victims were Danang civilians” killed by the Viet 
Cong and North Vietnamese. 

After the breakdown of negotiations in October 1972, “The North 
was again intransigent,” we learn—namely, in demanding that the 
agreements be signed, a fact ignored; and “In South Vietnam, too, the 
agreement was still unacceptable,” the familiar evasion of U.S. respon¬ 
sibility (see “The Paris Peace Agreements, p. 228). The terms of the 
January 1973 agreement are given, but with no indication that the U.S. 
government announced at once its intent to disregard them, as it did. 
Rather, we hear that “to the North Vietnamese and Vietcong, the 
struggle had not ended,” because “Vietnam was still divided.” The facts 
are quite different, as we have seen. They are indeed more accurately 
stated, although briefly, two episodes later (episode 12), although the 
U.S. role is suppressed except by implication: “America was still com¬ 
mitted to South Vietnam,” the narrator says, without noting that this 
commitment to the GVN, identified with South Vietnam by the U.S* 
government and by PBS, is in explicit violation of the agreements 
