by their extensive and uncritical use as experts by the elite press* news 
magazines* and television news and talk shows, 28 Sterling* in addition 
to her Reader** Digest article, had three substantial pieces in the Wall 
Street Journal and several articles in the New York Times* Her views 
were given repeated airing on CBS News, without rebuttal, Henze 
accounted for twelve of the fourteen articles on the Bulgarian Connec¬ 
tion case in the Christian Science Monitor between September 1982 and 
May 1985, and his articles were used widely elsewhere. The only opin¬ 
ion piece on the Bulgarian Connection that appeared in the 
Philadelphia Inquirer during that same period was by Michael Ledeen. 
Sterling* Henze* and Ledeen together accounted for 76 percent of the 
time in three shows on the subject on the “McNeil-Lehrer News 
Hour.” No tough questions were asked of them on these shows, and no 
dissident voices were heard* perhaps because Sterling and Henze 
refused to appear on television shows (or in college debates) with 
people who opposed their views* and Henze insisted on approving in 
advance any questions to be asked. Thus their initial dominance was 
further enhanced by coercive tactics. 28 

If we ask the deeper question of why these experts should predomi¬ 
nate in the first place* we believe the answer must be found in the power 
of their sponsors and the congeniality of their views to the corporate 
community and the mainstream media. Their messages passed quite 
easily through the filters of a propaganda system. Sterling was funded 
and published by Reader’s Digest^ which gave her enormous outreach 
and immediate brand-name recognition. The conservative network is 
fond of Sterling* so their large stable of columnists and think-tank 
affiliates, like the Georgetown Center for Strategic and International 
Studies (CSIS) and the American Enterprise Institute* pushes her 
views. The Reagan administration was also delighted with Sterling— 
despite her frequent denunciations of the CIA and the State Depart¬ 
ment for their cowardice in failing to pursue terrorism and the 
Bulgarian Connection with sufficient aggressiveness!—and so were the 
New York Times , Time, Newsweek, CBS News, and many others. Ster¬ 
ling was the outstanding popular expositor of the theme urged upon the 
conferees at the Jonathan Institute meeting of July 1979 and advocated 
by the Reagan administration team anxious to create a moral environ¬ 
ment for an arms race and global support of counterrevolutionary 
freedom fighters. 30 Henze* an old CIA hand and protege of Zbigniew 
Brzezinski* was also funded by the Reader’s Digest ; and Ledeen was 
affiliated with both the CSIS and the Reagan political team. If the 
media transmit literal lies by this Big Three—which they did fre¬ 
quently—the flak machines remain silent. As one network official told 



THE KGB-EULGARIAN PLOT TO KILL THE POPE 159 


one of the authors, if a critic of the Bulgarian Connection were allowed 
on the air, the official would “have to make sure that every i was dotted 
and r crossed; but with Sterling, there were no problems,” 

Again in conformity with a propaganda model, it was of no appar¬ 
ent concern to the mass media that Sterling, Henze, and Ledeen were 
exceptionally biased sources, immune to the rules of evidence and, in 
fact, agents of disinformation. We discussed earlier Sterling’s dismis¬ 
sal of Agca’s commitment to Turkes and her handling of Agca’s gun, 
and similar cases could be cited in large number. 31 Sterling’s Terror 
Network is notable for its gullibility in accepting at face value claims 
fed her by Israeli, South African, and Argentinian secret police, and, 
most notably, the Czech Stalinist defector, Jan Sejna, 32 whose evi¬ 
dence for a Soviet terror network came from a document forged by 
the CIA to test Sejna's integrity! 33 A remarkable feature of Sterling’s 
Time of the Assassins and other writings on the Bulgarian Connection 
is her reiterated belief that the Reagan administration and CIA 
dragged their feet in pursuing the Red plot because of their interest in 
detente* 34 And despite her phenomenal sales and uncritical reception 
in the U.S. media. Sterling bemoaned the “accepted position, the so¬ 
cially indispensable position * * * if you care to move in certain circles 
and if you care to be accepted at your job professionally” in the West, 
of doubting the Bulgarian Connection, which she attributed to the 
success of the KGB in pushing a forty-page booklet on the plot by 
Soviet journalist Iona Andronov. 35 

These evidences of charlatanry did not impair Sterling's credibility 
with the U.S. mass media—in fact, the New York Times allowed her 
front-page space and a regular role as a reporter of news on the Bul¬ 
garian connection. By doing this, the Times guaranteed that editorial 
policy would control the news fit to print. This was displayed fully in 
Sterling’s front-page news story of prosecutor Albano’s report on June 
10,1984* The most important new information in that report—that on 
June 28, 1983, Agca had retracted a substantial part of his evidence 
against the Bulgarians—was omitted from Sterling’s story, although she 
coyly suggested that some undescribed points had been retracted that 
were already “corroborated.” This was seriously misleading. Agca's 
having visited Antonov's apartment and met with his family was never 
corroborated, and the details he gave on these matters had previously 
been cited by Sterling and Henze as crucial corroboration of his general 
claims. His retraction thus led to the important question of how Agca 
had learned details about Antonov’s apartment without having been 
there. This issue was never seriously addressed in the New York 
Times. 36 


160 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


Paul Henze was a longtime CIA official who had been head of the 
CIA station in Turkey and a specialist in propaganda. Former Turkish 
