enthusiastic U,S, support in the early 1980s. 

The comparison between Timor and phase II in Cambodia was 
particularly striking, and was occasionally noted after the fact. The 
excuses now produced for this refusal to report what was happening in 
Timor, or to protest these atrocities or act to stop them, are instructive 
in the present context. Thus, William Shawcross rejects the obvious 
interpretation of the comparative response to Timor and Cambodia in 
favor of a “more structurally serious explanation”: “a comparative lack 
of sources” and lack of access to refugees. 86 Lisbon is a two-hour flight 


THE INDOCHINA WARS (II): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 285 


from London, and even Australia is not notably harder to reach than 
the Thai-Cambodia border, but the many Timorese refugees in Lisbon 
and Australia were ignored by the media, which preferred “facts” 
offered by the State Department and Indonesian generals. Similarly, 
the media ignored readily available refugee studies from sources at least 
as credible as those used as the basis for the ideologically serviceable 
outrage over the Khmer Rouge, and disregarded highly credible wit¬ 
nesses who reached New York and Washington along with additional 
evidence from church sources and others. The coverage of Timor 
actually declined sharply as massacres increased with mounting U.S. 
support. The real and “structurally serious” reason for this difference 
in scope and character of coverage is not difficult to discern (see chapter 
1), although not very comfortable for Western opinion, and becomes 
still more obvious when a broader range of cases is considered that 
illustrate the same conclusions. 87 


6.2.7. Phase III in Indochina: 
Cambodia and the bleeding of 
Vietnam 

As we write in 1987, Western moralists remain silent as their govern¬ 
ments provide the means for Indonesia to continue its campaign of 
terror and repression in Timor. Meanwhile* the United States backs the 
DK coalition, largely based on the Khmer Rouge, because of its “conti¬ 
nuity” with the Pol Pot regime, so the State Department informed 
Congress in 1982. The reason for this differential reaction to the Fretilin 
guerrillas resisting Indonesian aggression in Timor, and the Khmer 
Rouge guerrillas attacking Cambodia from Thai bases, is also explained 
by the State Department: the Khmer Rouge-based coalition is 
“unquestionably” more representative of the people of Cambodia than 
Fretilin is of the Timorese. 00 There is, therefore, no need to puzzle over 
the apparent inconsistency during the late 1970s in U.S. attitudes to¬ 
ward Pol Pot and the Indonesian generals: the former, the object of 
hatred and contempt for the massacres in Cambodia under his rule 
