headline and article itself equating the government's aid to, and agree¬ 
ments with* its own political parties with U.S. intervention to get the 
Nicaraguan parties to boycott the election! CBS, Newsweek, and Time 
ignored the U.S. bribe program entirely. Time gave great emphasis to 
the number of candidates and the withdrawal of several* but it never 
once mentioned that this was helped along by U.S, connivance, bribes* 
and pressure. It even quotes without comment the State Department 
fabrication that “it did not try to influence the outcome of the election” 
(Nov. 19* 1984). All substantive evidence is placed in the black hole. In 
the same article, Time asserts that “the U.S. had pushed hard for 
elections in which all parties felt free to participate, 55 a fabrication of 
considerable audacity. 

As regards the scope of electoral options in Nicaragua* the Irish 
delegation noted that “The [political parties] law guarantees participa¬ 
tion to political parties of all ideologies,” an interesting point validated 
by a range of political opinion in the contesting parties far wider than 
that found in El Salvador and Guatemala (or the United States). 

LASA states that “No major political tendency in Nicaragua was 
denied access to the electoral process in 1984” (p. 18). This* of course, 
could not be said of El Salvador and Guatemala. These important 
features of the Nicaraguan law and practice were not mentioned in the 
U.S. media or compared with those of the client states. 

The Irish delegation stressed two facts about Cruz as the “main 
opposition. 55 First, 

The delegation found no evidence that these parties [the three 
small Cruz-related parties that boycotted the election] had wide 
support within the country. Speaking with many political figures* 
including representatives of the legitimate opposition parties, it 
became clear that the intention of Arturo Cruz to stand for elec¬ 
tion was dubious from the start. . . . While considerable coverage 
was given to these parties in the international press^ members of 
the delegation found that their impact among the population was 
scant and few people supported their policies (p. 7). 

Second, the Irish delegation stressed the fact that the populace was free 
not to vote or to spoil votes* and the low level of both, “despite the 
abstentionism promoted by 55 the Cruz parties, deflated their claims to 
any serious support (p. 7)- The LASA report reached similar conclu- 



128 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


sionSj based on an extensive review of the evidence, namely: (i) that 
“circumstantial evidence” indicates the strong probability that Cruz 
