
ground: the clever Bulgarians had Agca purchase a gun through a 
known Fascist to strengthen the case that Agca was a right-winger who 
could not possibly be connected to the Communist powers. 

A final set of problems for the SHK model lies in the extraordinary 
level of incompetence and gross violations of the principles of plausible 
deniability that it attributes to the Bulgarian and Soviet secret police— 
features that coexist uneasily with the superspy image invoked else¬ 
where in the model. At various points* SHK contended that the Soviets 
and Bulgarians were professionals who could afford to go after the pope 
because they would never be implicated themselves. But hiring Agca* 
a wanted criminal and a mentally unbalanced rightist* would appear 
extremely foolish* as the cover would quickly be blown in the likely 
event that he was caught. In Sterling’s initial tale* the KGB wanted him 
to be caught—or at least to have his body identified—to discredit 
Turkey. With the shift to weakening Solidarity as the motive* the threat 
of disclosure of Bulgarian-Soviet involvement would seem very serious* 
Yet the Bulgarians and KGB hired Agca and then failed to kill him* 
Another anomaly was bringing Agca to Sofia for instructions* If he had 
already been recruited in Turkey* wouldn’t bringing him to Sofia be a 
foolish compromising of his carefully prepared “cover 51 ? If so* doesn’t 
his visit to Sofia constitute an argument against Soviet and Bulgarian 
involvement? 

While Agca 5 s November 1982 confession that he had Bulgarian co¬ 
conspirators made the Bulgarian Connection instantly “true” for the 
Western media* it wreaked havoc with the SHK model and with the 
logic of “plausible deniability* 55 If* as Agca confessed* the Bulgarians 
connived with him in Rome* escorted him to St, Peter's Square to plan 
the attack* entertained him at their apartments* and participated in the 
attack itself* what happens to the logic of the “cover 5 *? 


4.3. AN ALTERNATIVE MODEL 

An alternative explanation of the Bulgarian Connection can be derived 
from the questions the U.S, press would surely have raised if an analo¬ 
gous scenario had occurred in Moscow* in which Agca* who had briefly 
visited the United States on his travels* and has been in a Soviet prison 
for seventeen months after having shot a high Soviet official* now 
confesses that three U.S. embassy members were his co-conspirators* 
In this case* the U*S* press would have paid close attention to the 
convenience of the confession to Soviet propaganda needs* to the sev- 



THE KGB-BULGARIAN PLOT TO KILL THE POPE 151 


enteen-month delay in the naming of Americans* and to the obvious 
possibility that Agca had been encouraged or coerced into revising his 
story. They would have focused intently on Agca’s prison conditions, 
his visitors there, his amenability to a “deal 15 with his captors, and any 
evidence in his statements or from other sources that he had been 
coached. The fact that Agca had visited the United States, among 
twelve countries, would not be considered strong evidence of CIA 
involvement, and the press might even have pointed out that a mini¬ 
mally competent CIA would not have brought Agca to Washington for 
instructions in the first place. 

The alternative model would take the same fact that SHK start out 
with—Agca’s stay in Sofia, Bulgaria—but interpret it differently. That 
visit violates principles of plausible deniability and would be especially 
foolish if the KGB had already recruited Agca in Turkey. On the other 
hand, it provides a Western propaganda system with the necessary tie 
between Agca’s terrorist attack m Rome and the Soviet bloc. The 
convenience of Agca’s confession—to Socialist leader Craxi, to the 
Christian Democrats and neo-Fascists in Italy, and to Reagan searching 
for a tie-in between “international terrorism” and the Soviet Union—is 
also crystal dear, and would immediately suggest to an objective press 
the possibility that this “demand” might have elicited an appropriate 
“supply” from the imprisoned Agca. The lag in Agca’s naming of any 
Bulgarians—seventeen months after he entered an Italian prison and 
seven months after he had agreed to “cooperate” with the investigating 
magistrate, Ilario Martella—is also highly suggestive. Why did it take 
him so long to name his co-conspirators? Sterling tried to explain this 
on the ground that Agca had hopes that the Bulgarians would “spring 
him” and gave them time; his successive elaborations of claims and 
subsequent retractions she explained in terms of Agca’s “signaling” to 
his alleged partners. This complex and speculative attempt to rational¬ 
ize inconvenient facts is not necessary; a very straightforward explana¬ 
tion based on Agca’s character and affiliations and the inducements 
known to have been offered to him (described below) does quite 
nicely. 15 Furthermore, Sterling’s explanation does not account for the 
fact that Agca failed to provide serious evidence late in the trial, long 
after it was clear that the Bulgarians had not responded to his alleged 
signals. 

Another suggestive feature of Agca’s confession is that it followed the 
creation and wide media distribution of the SHK model. During the 
course of the investigation of the plot, it was revealed that the impris¬ 
oned Agca had access to newspapers, radio, and television, among other 
modes of personal communication with the outside world. It was also 



l$2 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


