thus for the general public, 14 Centralization within the top tier was 
substantially increased by the post-World War II rise of television and 
the national networking of this important medium. Pre-television news 
markets were local* even if heavily dependent on the higher tiers and 
a narrow set of sources for national and international news; the net¬ 
works provide national and international news from three national 
sources* and television is now the principal source of news for the 
public. 15 The maturing of cable, however* has resulted in a fragmenta¬ 
tion of television audiences and a slow erosion of the market share and 
power of the networks. 

Table 1-1 provides some basic financial data for the twenty-four 
media giants (or their controlling parent companies) that make up the 
top tier of media companies in the United States. 16 This compilation 
includes: (i) the three television networks: ABC (through its parent, 
Capital Cities), CBS* and NBC (through its ultimate parent, General 
Electric [GE]); (2) the leading newspaper empires: New York Time$> 
Washington Pasty Los Angeles Times (Times-Mirror)* Wall Street Journal 
(Dow Jones)* Kmght-Ridder, Gannett, Hearst* Scripps-Howard, New- 
house (Advance Publications), and the Tribune Company; (3) the major 
news and general-interest magazines: Time, Newsweek (subsumed 
under Washington Post), Reader^ Digest, TV Guide (Triangle)* and U.S, 
News 6 s World Report ; (4) a major book publisher (McGraw-Hill); and 
(5) other cable-TV systems of large and growing importance: those of 
Murdoch* Turner, Cox, General Corp., Taft, Storer* 17 and Group W 
(Westinghouse). Many of these systems are prominent in more than one 
field and are only arbitrarily placed in a particular category (Time, Inc.* 
is very important in cable as well as magazines; McGraw-Hill is a major 
publisher of magazines; the Tribune Company has become a large force 
in television as well as newspapers; Hearst is important in magazines 
as well as newspapers; and Murdoch has significant newspaper interests 
as well as television and movie holdings). 

These twenty-four companies are large, profit-seeking corporations, 
owned and controlled by quite wealthy people. It can be seen in table 
i-i that all but one of the top companies for whom data are available 
have assets in excess of $1 billion, and the median size (middle item by 
size) is $2,6 billion. It can also be seen in the table that approximately 
three-quarters of these media giants had after-tax profits in excess of 
$100 million, with the median at $183 million. 

Many of the large media companies are fully integrated into the 
market, and for the others, too, the pressures of stockholders, directors, 
and bankers to focus on the bottom line are powerful. These pressures 




6 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 

