made obligatory members of civil patrols with military functions under 
close army surveillance. According to the British parliamentary group 
that visited Guatemala in 1984, “The civilian patrol system is imple¬ 
mented by terror, and designed also to sow terror, . , . People who do 
anything out of the ordinary come under immediate suspicion and are 
taken by the patrols to the army's destacamiento . Interrogation will be 
done by the army, but the killing of murdered suspects [is] often by the 
civilian patrols.” 20 Bishops Taylor and O’Brien, representing the 
Roman Catholic Bishops' Conferences of Scotland and England-Wales 
respectively, reported after their visit to Guatemala in 1984 that 

The civilian population is under almost total control by a heavy 
army and police presence throughout the country, which we were 
able to observe. There is also a nationwide network of civil defense 
patrols, military commissioners and informers, and “model vil¬ 
lages” serving in some cases as internment camps for the Indian 
population from the areas of conflict. Much of Guatemala resem¬ 
bles a country under military occupation. One of our informants 
summed up the situation by saying that the military had estab¬ 
lished a system of “structural control.” 21 

The InterAmerican Commission on Human Rights, following an on¬ 
site visit in May 1985, also found that freedom of speech and assembly 
did not exist in Guatemala: 

The right of assembly and freedom of association, considered in 
Articles 15 and 16 of the American Convention, are also restricted 
and curtailed, because existing security measures in the Develop¬ 
ment Poles and the strict supervision of the Civil Defense Patrols 
inhibit residents from taking part in any social, ideological, cultu¬ 
ral or other assemblies or associations. All such meetings, when 
they do occur, are subject to surveillance, supervision and control 
by the authorities, so they do nor enjoy the freedom implied by 
such rights. 22 

Public demonstrations were permissible in Guatemala during the 
1984-85 elections, with three days’ advance notice and approval of the 
military authorities. In the Guatemalan context, however, this grant of 
rights was not meaningful. The delegation of the International Human 



96 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


Rights Law Group and the Washington Office on Latin America noted 
that whatever the election guarantees, 

the military and civil defense patrols and the climate of fear also 
made it difficult for many Guatemalans to organize and assemble. 
