tion to send assistance to Vietnam”—naturally enough, since the 



240 MANUF AXTURING CONSENT 


United States remains committed to ensure that its achievements are 
not threatened by recovery of the countries it destroyed, 165 

There is little hint of any of this, or of the similar Carthaginian 
devastation in Laos and Cambodia, in mainstream U.S. media coverage. 
Rather, with remarkable uniformity and self-righteousness, the prob¬ 
lems of reconstruction, hampered further by the natural catastrophes 
and continuing war to which the United States has made what contri¬ 
bution it can, are attributed solely to Communist brutality and inepti¬ 
tude, The sole remaining interest in postwar Vietnam in the U.S, media 
has been the recovery of remains of U.S, personnel presumed to be 
killed in action, the Vietnamese preoccupation with other matters serv¬ 
ing as further proof of their moral insensitivity. 

In one of his sermons on human rights. President Carter explained 
that we owe Vietnam no debt and have no responsibility to render it 
any assistance because “the destruction was mutual,” 164 a statement 
that elicited no comment, to our knowledge, apart from our own—a fact 
that speaks volumes about the prevailing cultural climate. Some feel 
that there may once have been a debt but that it has been amply repaid. 
Under the headline “The Debt to the Indochinese Is Becoming a Fiscal 
Drain,” Bernard Gwertzman quotes a State Department official who 
“said he believed the United States has now paid its moral debt for its 
involvement on the losing side in Indochina,” The remark, which also 
passed without comment, is illuminating: we owe no debt for mass 
slaughter and for leaving three countries in ruins, no debt to the mil¬ 
lions of maimed and orphaned, to the peasants who still die today from 
exploding ordnance left from the U.S. assault- Rather, our moral debt 
results only from the fact that we did not win. By this logic, if the 
Russians win in Afghanistan, they will have no moral debt at all Pro¬ 
ceeding further, how have we paid our moral debt for failing to win? 
By resettling Vietnamese refugees fleeing the lands we ravaged, “one 
of the largest, most dramatic humanitarian efforts in history” according 
to Roger Winter, director of the U.S. Committee for Refugees. But 
“despite the pride,” Gwertzman continues, “some voices in the Reagan 
Administration and in Congress are once again asking whether the war 
debt has now been paid. „ . ,” 165 

The media are not satisfied with “mutual destruction” that effaces 
all responsibility for some of the major war crimes of the modem era. 
Rather, the perpetrator of the crimes must be seen as the injured party. 
We find headlines reading: “Vietnam, Trying to Be Nicer, Still Has a 
Long Way to Go.” “Ifs about time the Vietnamese demonstrated some 
good will,” said Charles Printz, of Human Rights Advocates Interna¬ 
tional, referring to negotiations about the Amerasian children who 







THE INDOCHINA WARS (i): VIETNAM 24I 


constitute a tiny fraction of the victims of U*S, aggression in Indochina, 
Barbara Crossette adds that the Vietnamese have also not been suffi¬ 
ciently forthcoming on the matter of remains of American soldiers* 
although their behavior may be improving: “There has been progress* 
albeit slow* on the missing Americans*” The unresolved problem of the 
war is what they did to us* Since we were simply defending ourselves 
from “internal aggression” in Vietnam* it surely makes sense to con¬ 
sider ourselves the victims of the Vietnamese, 

In a derisive account of Vietnamese “laments” over the failure of the 
United States to improve relations with them* Barbara Crossette re¬ 
ports their “continuing exaggeration of Vietnam's importance to 
Americans” under the headline: “For Vietnamese* Realism Is in Short 
Supply,” The Vietnamese do not comprehend their “irrelevance*” she 
explains with proper imperial contempt* U.S. interest in Vietnam* she 
continues, is limited to the natural American outrage over Hanoi's 
invasion of Cambodia (to overthrow our current ally Pol Pot), and its 
failure to be sufficiently forthcoming “on the issue of American service¬ 
men missing since the end of the war.” She cites a Pentagon statement 
noting that Vietnam “has agreed to return the remains of 20 more 
servicemen” and expressing the hope that the Communists will proceed 
“to resolve this long-standing humanitarian issue*” She quotes an 
“Asian official” as saying that “We all know they have the bones some¬ 
where, , , , If Hanoi's leaders are serious about building their country, 
the Vietnamese will have to deal fairly with the United States.” When 
a Vietnamese official suggested that the U.S. send food aid to regions 
where starving villagers are being asked to spend their time and energy 
searching for the remains of American pilots killed while destroying 
their country. State Department spokeswoman Phyllis Oakley reacted 
with great anger: “We are outraged at any suggestion of linking food 
assistance with the return of remains,” she declaimed. So profound is 
the U.S. commitment to humanitarian imperatives and moral values 
that it cannot permit these lofty ideals to be tainted by associating them 
with such trivial concerns and indecent requests, 166 It is difficult to 
know how to react to a cultural climate in which such words can be 
spoken, evoking no reaction. 

According to standard state and media doctrine, South Vietnam (i,e*, 
