distant world (see the Times* s description of the murder of Michael 



WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS 45 


Jerome Cypher, in table 2-2). But that is a matter of editorial choice. 
The drama is there for the asking—only the press concern is missing.' 2 


TABLE 2.2 

The Savageries Inflicted on Worthy 
and Unworthy Victims, as Depicted 
in the New York Times 

WORTHY VICTIMS 

Jerzy Popieluszko, a Polish priest* murdered on October 19, 1994, 

(1) Account at finding of body: “The sources who saw the priest’s body on Tuesday, 
said it was badly bruised, indicating he had been beaten after he was kidnapped on a 
highway near the town of Torun. The autopsy also showed that Father Popieluszko 
had been gagged at the mouth and apparently tied with a rope from neck to feet so 
that if he struggled he would strangle himself, they said. The sources said they could 
not confirm reports quoting members of the slain priest’s family as saying he had 
suffered injuries to his jaw and skull’ 1 (Dec. 29, 1984). 

(2) Account at trial of murderers: “The film showed clearly that the priest's bent legs 
were tied to a noose around his neck in such a way that if he straightened them he would 
be strangled. The rope binding his hands had evidently come loose in the water. Several 
gags had also worked free and lay covering his clerical collar and the front of his 
cassock. From his legs hung a sack of rocks that, according to earlier testimony, had 
been carried all over Poland for the week that the three assailants were pursuing the 
priest. When the cameras were trained on the priest’s face, the narration by a police 
officer at the reservoir declared that £ there are clear signs of beating.’ This was con¬ 
firmed by medical evidence offered Thursday by Dr. Maria Byrdy, a pathologist, who 
said Father Popieluszko had been struck more than a dozen times with a club” (Jan. 
26, 1985), 


UNWORTHY VICTIMS 

Michael Jerome Cypher ; an American priest murdered in Honduras, 

“The bodies were found in a dynamited well on an eastern Honduran estate . . .” 
(July 19, 1975), Note: There was no arrest or trial. 

Jaime Alcina, a Spanish priest of the Catholic Action Workers movement* 
following his arrest in Chile: 

“Several days later a body with 10 bullet holes in the back was found in the Mapocho 
River. A Spanish consul identified the body as that of Father Alcma'* (Oct. 1, 1973). 
Note: There was no arrest or trial. 




46 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


Archbishop Oscar Arnolfo Romero, murdered in El Salvador on March 24, 

1980: 

“Archbishop Romero was killed by a sniper who got out of a red car, apparently stood 
just inside the door of the Chapel of the Divine Providence Hospital* fired a single shot 
at the prelate and fled. The bullet struck the archbishop in the heart, according to a 
doctor at the hospital where the prelate was taken’* (Mar. 25, 1980), Note: There was 
no arrest or trial. 

Maria Rosario Godoy de Cuevas, secretary of the Mutual Support Group, 
murdered in Guatemala on April 4, 1985: 

“The body of the secretary of the Support Group for Families of the Detained and 
Disappeared in Guatemala was found Friday in a ravine nine miles south of Guatemala 
City, according to a spokesman for the group. The bodies of her brother and young 
son were also in the car” (Apr. 7, 1985, p. 5).* Note: There was no arrest or trial. 

Jean Donovan, Ita Ford s Dorothy Kazel, and Maura Clarke, four American 
women murdered in El Salvador, December 4, 1980: 

(1) Account at the finding of the bodies: 

“Witnesses who found the grave said it was about five feet deep. One woman had been 
shot in the face, another in the breast. Two of the women were found with their 
blood-stained underpants around their ankles” (Dec. 5, 1980).* 

(2) Account at the trial of the murderers: 

No description was given, although medical testimony was presented to the court; see 
text. 


* For details that were not presented in this account, see the accompanying 
text. 


The murder of one of the seventy-two* Father Rutilio Grande, was 
