handling evidence. 

In this connection, we should observe that the numerous stories on the Hu6 
massacre cited by Braestrup in self-refutation referred to the official allega¬ 
tions that 300 to 400 government officials were killed in Hu6, a considerable 
massacre but “only one-tenth of the civilian toll in the fighting,” so that “it 
did not seem like a major story,” Gareth Porter comments; he adds that “What 
made the ‘Hue massacre’ a major story was the publicizing by U.S. embassy 
propagandist Douglas Pike, who wrote a pamphlet on the subject in late 1969 
at the request of the American ambassador to Saigon, Ellsworth Bunker.” 
Pike’s account was given wide coverage when it appeared and has become the 
basis for the standard versions since, despite the dubious source: “given the 
fact that Pike was relying on the Saigon political warfare department for most 
of his data, which was otherwise unverified, one might have asked for more 
skepticism and reserve from the press,” Porter observes—rather plausibly, it 
would seem. Porter adds that the documents made available by the U.S. 
mission in 1971 “contradicted Pike on every major point.” According to former 
CIA analyst Frank Snepp, “The whole idea of a bloodbath was conjured out 
of thin air,” and the stories were planted in the press by American officials “to 
generate sympathy for the South Vietnamese abroad”—in short, the “careful 
psychological warfare program pinning the blame on the communists” urged 
by “seasoned observers,” as John Lengel of AP reported from Hu6. 2 

Presenting no evidence or argument, Braestrup accepts Pike’s analysis and 
the U.S. government position as correct. In a footnote, he remarks that “Pike’s 
account was challenged by D. Gareth Porter, a Cornell University graduate 
student, admirer of the National Liberation Front, and, briefly, a Saigon 
resident,” but dismisses this as part of “a minor point of political contention” 
( 1 ,285-86). He describes Pike, in contrast, as “the independent-minded USIA 
specialist on the Vietcong” ( 1 ,196), 3 and makes no reference to the detailed 
analysis of Pike’s allegations that had been presented by Porter, one of the few 
American scholars concerned with Vietnam. Similarly, Leonard Sussman takes 
it as obvious, without argument, that the government position must be correct, 
and that “the war’s largest systematic execution of civilians” is the responsi¬ 
bility of the Viet Cong—thus excluding the systematic slaughter of thousands 
of civilians in Hu6 by U.S. firepower, possibly including many of those at¬ 
tributed to the Viet Cong massacre. 4 Also unmentioned here is the curious 
timing of the exposures that have since become the standard version of the 
Hue massacre, a few days after the belated exposure of the My Lai massacre 
in late November 1969, when 


Army officers in Saigon made available “newly found” captured Viet 
Cong documents showing that Communist troops killed nearly 2,900 
Vietnamese during the Hue offensive in February, 1968. Officers said the 
documents went unnoticed in U.S. military files for nineteen months 
until a correspondent’s questions about Hue brought them to light. “I 
know it sounds incredible, but that’s the truth,” one official said. 5 

We will not attempt to explore in this review what is not so much as attempted 
in the Freedom House study, but merely note, once again, that we have here 
not a work of scholarship but rather a government propaganda tract. 

Max Frankel commented in the New York Times (Feb. 11,1968) that pres¬ 
sures at home and in Vietnam “are thought to have raised once again the 
temptation of further military escalation” (I, 584, italicized by Braestrup for 
emphasis as an example of raising “straw men”). Frankel was quite accurate 
in this measured statement. As Braestrup points out, “Wheeler and Westmore¬ 
land agreed that it was also a good time to urge a bolder Vietnam strategy, with 
more troops to gain quicker results: i.e., forays into Laos, Cambodia, and 
possibly that part of North Vietnam just above the DMZ.” Why then the 
“straw man” charge? Because, Braestrup objects, escalation “was hardly a 
tempting prospect for Johnson” (his emphasis), hardly Frankel’s point. Brae¬ 
strup claims further that Frankel, in this article, suggested “that escalation— 
notably a reserve call-up—was probable” (I, 586). Frankel’s article does not 
appear in the accompanying volume of documents; turning to it, we discover 
that Braestrup’s claim is another Freedom House exclusive, suggested no¬ 
where in Frankel’s article, which is noteworthy only for its standard reiteration 
of government propaganda about the goal of bringing “security” to “the people 
of South Vietnam”—by B-52 bombing of villages, the exploits of Task Force 
Barker at and around My Lai at just that time as part of the general ravaging 
of Quang Ngai Province, etc. 

After television, Newsweek is the worst offender. Let us therefore inquire 
further into its misdeeds. In what Braestrup describes as “Newsweek*^ major 
statement on the Thieu-Ky regime,” a March 18 feature entitled “Vietnam: A 
Reappraisal,” the journal commented accurately in an editorial entitled “The 
Political Morass” that “land reform, a vital element in any effort to win the 
loyalty of the peasantry, has not been tackled seriously” (I, 534-36), a truism 
familiar to everyone from the American high command to officials in Washing¬ 
ton. Braestrup comments: “It is difficult, once again, to fathom Newsweek* s 
logic. Surely, neither Newsweek nor the Vietnamese peasant expected the 
regime to tackle land reform seriously in the aftermath of Tet.” It is perfectly 
obvious that in this “reappraisal,” Newsweek is referring to the general picture, 
not specifically to the post-Tet period of one month. 

According to Braestrup, “Newsweek, throughout the February-March 1968 
period, was to refer, in passing, to the ‘wily’ Giap, ‘tough’ North Vietnamese 
regulars, ‘ominous’ enemy activity, and in general, to a foe without setbacks 
or flaws” (I, 229). Turning to the facts, on March 11, Newsweek presented an 
analysis in which it reported that the Communists “were still plagued by the 
confusion that is characteristic of all military operations.” The report (II, 2i6f.) 
goes on to describe “inexplicable” failure to blow up a crucial bridge, failure 
to use main forces adequately to maintain momentum, misassessment of popu- 



lar moods and U.S.-ARVN tactics, inadequate preparation of troops, etc., 
concluding that “the communists did not achieve most of their objectives.” 
The following week’s article on Khe Sanh reports a marine view that “Charlie 
