classes in general, “At most, the variants reflect shades of strictly con¬ 
servative thinking/* 29 Given the extreme climate of fear* and threats for 
stepping out of line, even the conservative press is cautious and engages 
in continuous self-censorship. All the central topics that should be 
debated in this terrorized society are carefully avoided. 30 

In Nicaragua, once again, there have been no reported deaths of 
journalists by state terrorists, nor even threats of personal violence. In 
1984, the majority of the fifty-odd radio stations were privately owned, 
and some of them provided their own news programs; four other inde¬ 
pendent producers supplied radio news programs without prior censor¬ 
ship. Foreign radio and television from commercial and U,S, 
propaganda sources broadcasting from Costa Rica, Honduras, and else¬ 
where were of growing importance in 1984. 31 Two of the three newspa¬ 
pers were privately owned, one supportive of the government but 
critical of specific programs and actions, the other violently hostile. The 
latter, La Prensa , which represented the small, ultraconservative mi¬ 
nority and supported the contras and a foreign-sponsored invasion of 
the country, was allowed to operate throughout the 1984 election, al¬ 
though it was censored. The censorship still allowed the paper to 
publish manifestos of opposition groups and a pastoral letter critical of 
the regime. No comparable paper has been allowed to exist above¬ 
ground, even briefly, in El Salvador and Guatemala. 

There is no doubt that the media in Nicaragua have been under 
government constraint, with censorship and periodic emergency con¬ 
trols that seriously encroached on freedom of the press. 32 It should be 
noted, however, that Nicaragua is under foreign attack and in a state 
of serious warfare. John S. Nichols points out that under the U.S. 
Espionage Act of 1917, over one hundred publications were banned 
from the mails, and hundreds of people were jailed for allegedly inter¬ 
fering with military recruitment. Furthermore, 

Given that the United States was a relatively mature and homoge¬ 
nous political system during World War I and was not particularly 
threatened by the fighting, the range of public discussion tolerated 
in Nicaragua during the first five years of the revolution was 
remarkable. Despite assertions by President Reagan, IAPA, and 
others that the control of the Nicaraguan media was virtually 
totalitarian, the diversity of ownership and opinion was unusual 
for a Third World country, particularly one at war. 33 


LEGITIMIZING VERSUS MEANINGLESS THIRD WORLD ELECTIONS 99 


Our conclusion is that the condition of freedom of the press necessary 
for a free election was dearly absent in El Salvador and Guatemala, and 
that it was partially met in Nicaragua. 


3.2.3. Freedom of organization of 
intermediate groups* 

Perhaps the most important fact about El Salvador in the two years 
prior to the election of March 1982 was the decimation of popular and 
private organizations that could pose any kind of challenge to the army 
and oligarchy. As we noted in chapter 2* this was the main thrust of 
policy of the revolutionary junta from late 1979 onward, and thousands 
of leaders were murdered and numerous organizations were destroyed 
or driven underground. The teachers 5 union was decimated by several 
hundred murders; the university was occupied* looted, and closed down 
by the army; organized student and professional groups were destroyed 
by arrests and killings, and even the peasant union sponsored by the 
AFL-CIO (i.e., supporters of the regime) had some one hundred of its 
organizers and leaders murdered between October 1979 and the elec¬ 
tion of March 1982. 34 

In Guatemala, too, intermediate organizations such as peasant and 
trade unions, teacher and student groups, and professional organiza¬ 
tions have been regularly attacked by the armed forces since 1954- The 
process of demobilization of institutions threatening the dominant 
elites culminated in the early 1980s, when by government proclamation 
“illicit association 55 was made punishable by law. All groups “which 
follow, or are subordinated to, any totalitarian system of ideology” 
(evidently an exception is made of the Guatemalan armed forces and 
the national-security ideology) are illicit. Only the armed forces deter¬ 
mine when illicitness occurs. If General Mejia Victores finds the GAM 
mothers to be agents of subversion, they may be killed (see chapter 2). 
Unions, peasant groups, student and professional organizations have 
grown up periodically in Guatemala, only to be crushed by systematic 
murder as soon as their demands were pressed with any vigor. The 
1984-85 elections followed the greatest era of mass murder in modem 
Guatemalan history—under the regimes of Lucas Garcia, Rios Montt, 
and Mejia Victores. Union membership in 1985 was below its 1950 level, 
and other urban groups were decimated or inactive; the peasant major¬ 
ity was totally demobilized and under the tight control and surveillance 
of the military. 



TOO MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


In Nicaragua, again the contrast with the two U.S. clients is marked. 
Under Sandinista management there was a spurt in union and peasant 
organization. A deliberate attempt was made to mobilize the population 
to participate in decision-making at the local level and to interact with 
higher-level leaders, Oxfam compliments the Nicaraguan government 
highly for this effort, as we pointed out earlier. 
