ments: that the two parallel and equivalent “South Vietnamese parties” 



2$Z MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


are to proceed toward a settlement with no U.S. interference or effort 
to impose any Apolitical tendency” on the people of South Vietnam. In 
its "‘summary of basic dements of the Vietnam agreements” on January 
24, the White House announced that “the government of the Republic 
of (South) Vietnam continues in existence, recognized by the United 
States, its constitutional structure and leadership intact and un¬ 
changed”—the reason for the parentheses being that this “constitu¬ 
tional structure” identifies the GVN as the government of all Vietnam. 
This “constitutional structure” also outlawed the second of the two 
parallel and equivalent parties, along with “pro-communist neutralism” 
and any form of expression “aimed at spreading Communist policies, 
slogans and instructions”; and the GVN announced at once that such 
“illegal” actions would be suppressed by force, while President Thieu 
stated that “this is solely a ceasefire agreement, no more no less.” 145 
With these declarations, the United States and its client regime thus 
nullified the central principle of the Paris Agreements, and flatly re¬ 
jected the provisions for “the two South Vietnamese parties” to achieve 
“national reconciliation and concord” by peaceful means without 
forceful measures or repression. 

In short, the United States announced at once, clearly and without 
equivocation, that it intended to disregard every essential provision of 
the scrap of paper it was compelled to sign in Paris. 

Kissinger attempted to obfuscate the matter in his January 24 press 
conference, reprinted in full in the New York Times , 143 He claimed, 
falsely, that “we have achieved substantial changes” from the October 
9-Point Plan, thus implicitly offering a justification for the Christmas 
bombings. He stated that “what the civil war has been all about” is 
“who is the legitimate ruler of South Vietnam” and “is there such a 
thing as a South Vietnam even temporarily until unification,” claiming 
that the United States had achieved its objectives on these points by 
virtue of the “specific references to the sovereignty of South Vietnam” 
and “the right of the South Vietnamese people to self-determination”; 
and he claimed that the United States had also achieved its goal with 
regard to the status of the demarcation line. 

All of this was blatant deception. The wording of the agreements 
reflected the DRV-PRG position in all the respects Kissinger men¬ 
tioned, while Kissinger’s insinuation that the agreements permitted the 
United States to recognize the GVN as “the legitimate ruler of South 
Vietnam” is in explicit contradiction to the agreements he had just 
signed, as is his attempt to create the impression that the “civil war” 
is “between North and South Vietnam.” The core provision of the Paris 
Agreements establishes the GVN and the PRG as “the two South 




THE INDOCHINA WARS fl): VIETNAM 233 


Vietnamese parties,” parallel and equivalent* to move toward unifica¬ 
tion with the North, abrogating the provisional demarcation line, which 
has no political status. Kissinger was attempting to confuse “sove¬ 
reignty of South Vietnam” with “sovereignty within South Vietnam”; 
the latter is what the war “was all about” from the outset, and the 
agreements simply reiterated the position of “the enemy* 5 that this was 
a matter to be settled by the two South Vietnamese parties without 
external interference, as in the October 9-Point Plan. 144 

Just as in October, the purpose of this obfuscation was, in Nixon*s 
words, “to make sure that our version of the agreement was the one that 
had great public impact.” And again it succeeded. The media—without 
exception, to our knowledge—accepted the Kissinger-White House 
version as expressing the contents of the agreements, enabling them to 
interpret the PRG-DRV insistence on the actual terms of the Paris 
Agreements as an effort to disrupt them. Thus Joseph Kraft, a liberal 
dove on these issues, wrote that “Much of the blame goes to the 
Communists 55 for the subsequent breakdown of the cease-fire, because 
“Hanoi has never abandoned the objective of unifying all of Vietnam”; 
that is, Hanoi has never abandoned its objective of living up to the 
terms of the Geneva Accords of 1954, now explicitly reiterated in the 
Paris Agreements of January 1973. 145 As a dove, he also added that “just 
as much of the blame goes to President Thieu”—but none, of course, 
can be assigned to Washington, He cites Communist military actions 
in the South and dispatch of equipment as the major reason for the 
breakdown of the cease-fire, citing no evidence; as we shall see, the 
facts reveal quite a different reason. 

At the liberal extreme of U.S. opinion, Tom Wicker wrote that 

American policy, which never accepted the Geneva agreement, 
came to insist, instead, that South Vietnam was a legally con¬ 
stituted nation being subverted and invaded by another power; 
and that view is implied even in the documents that finally pro¬ 
duced the cease-fire. 14 * 

Wicker adopts Kissinger's version, which is in explicit contradiction to 
the actual documents; these simply reiterate the long-held position of 
the NLF and Hanoi with regard to the status of South Vietnam. 

In the New Republic, Stanley Karnow wrote that “the Vietcong 
