but that is to underestimate the ability of the ideological institutions to 
rally to a worthy cause: in this case, the cause of suppressing the truth 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (li); LAOS AND CAMBODIA 289 


about the Western response to “the decade of the genocide” and other 
atrocities. 

That there was “silence” over Pol Pot atrocities was also an insistent 
claim right at the peak of the bitter outrage over Pol Pot genocide. Time 
magazine published a major article by David Aikman on July 31,1978, 
claiming that the Khmer Rouge “experiment in genocide” was being 
ignored, and adding a new twist that was also taken up with enthusiasm 
in the subsequent reconstruction of hisrory; “there are intellectuals in 
the West so committed to the twin Molochs of our day—‘liberation and 
‘revolution 5 —that they can actually defend what has happened in Cam¬ 
bodia”; “some political theorists have defended it* as George Bernard 
Shaw and other Western intellectuals defended the brutal social engi¬ 
neering in the Soviet Union during the 1930s.” No one was mentioned, 
for the simple reason that no one could be found to fit the bill, although 
Time did vainly attempt to elicit positive statements about the Pol Pot 
regime from antiwar activists to buttress this useful thesis. 

Each of these themes—the “silence 55 of the West, the defense of Pol 
Pot by Western intellectuals—is unequivocally refuted by massive evi¬ 
dence that is well known, although ignored, by the mobilized intellec¬ 
tual culture. But this level of misrepresentation in the service of a noble 
cause still does not suffice. The two themes were combined by William 
Shawcross in an inspired agitprop achievement that carried the farce 
a step further.® 9 This new contribution evoked much enthusiasm; sev¬ 
eral of the comments just cited are from reviews of his book, or are 
obviously inspired by it. 

In his study of “Cambodia, Holocaust and Modern Conscience,” 
Shawcross muses on the relative “silence” of the West in the face of 
Khmer Rouge atrocities. The facts are radically different, but the idea 
that the West ignores Communist atrocities while agonizing over its 
own is far more appealing to the Western conscience. Shawcross then 
proceeds to adopt Aikman’s second thesis, applying it in an ingenious 
way to explain the mechanism that lies behind this unwillingness of the 
West to face up to Communist atrocities, so notable a feature of West¬ 
ern life. The silence over phase II of the genocide, he argues, resulted 
from “the skepticism (to use a mild term) displayed by the Western left 
toward the stories coming out of Democratic Kampuchea. That skepti¬ 
cism was most fervently and frequently expressed by Noam Chomsky 
..[who] asserted that from the moment of the Khmer Rouge victory 
in 1975 the Western press colluded with Western and anti-Communist 
