the apartment and met Antonov’s family. The details he had given 
about apartment and family then became inexplicable* except on the 
supposition that Agca had been fed information while in prison. In a 
number of other instances Agca provided information that bore strong 
suspicion of having been provided by officials and agents of the court 
or the police. The London Sunday Times reporters* who interviewed 
one of the accused Bulgarians in Sofia* wrote that “When asked by 
Martelia in Bulgaria whether he had any salient physical features, 
Vassilev said that he had a mole on his left cheek. In a subsequent 
confession, as Vassilev points out, *Agca described my mole in the very 
same words which I used in describing it here. 5 ” 23 

During the course of the Rome trial in 1985-86, no trace was ever 
found of the money that Agca claimed he had received from the Bul¬ 
garians. The car that Agca indicated the Bulgarians had used to escort 
him around Rome was never located. No witness was ever found who 
saw him in his many supposed encounters with Bulgarians. His gun was 
transferred to him through the Turkish Gray Wolves network, and 
there was no shortage of evidence of his meetings with members of the 
Gray Wolves in Western Europe. The note that was found on Agca 5 s 
person on May 13, 1981* did not mention any collaborators, and sug¬ 
gested a loose timetable for the assassination attempt and a planned 
railroad trip to Naples, 

In sum, it is highly probable that Agca was offered a deal to talk, and 
that it was made dear to him that the people with power over his 
well-being wanted him to implicate the Bulgarians and the Soviet 
Union in the assassination attempt. He had access to the SHK model 
even before he confessed. His confession was therefore suspect from 
the start, and an “alternative model 55 of inducement-pressure coaching 
was plausible and relevant, from the Agca 5 s first implication of Bulgari¬ 
ans. This model became more cogent over time as Agca retracted 
strategic claims, and as no confirming evidence of a Bulgarian Connec¬ 
tion was produced. By the same token, the SHK model, implausible 
from the beginning, became even less tenable. 


4.4. THE MASS MEDIA’S 
UNCRITICAL ACCEPTANCE OF 
THE BULGARIAN CONNECTION 


Despite the implausibility of the SHK claim that Agca had been hired 
by the Bulgarians and the KGB to shoot the pope, and although it was 



THE KGB-BULG ARIAN PLOT TO KILL THE POPE I55 


sustained by argument that amounted to sheer humbuggery, the Bul¬ 
garian Connection met the standard of utility. In this case, therefore, 
as a propaganda model would anticipate, the U.S. mass media accepted 
the SHK model as valid, ignored the alternative model, and par¬ 
ticipated in a classic propaganda campaign that got the message of 
Bulgarian-Soviet guilt over to the public. Some members of the mass 
media helped originate the claim of a Bulgarian Connection, while 
others participated only in disseminating the SHK line (and excluding 
alternative views and inconvenient information). 

The campaign began with Sterling’s Reader’s Digest article of Sep¬ 
tember 1982, which was closely followed by the NBC-TV program of 
September 21, 1982, The outreach of these two statements asserting a 
Bulgarian Connection was great, and they were widely reported upon 
in the rest of the media in the form of a summary of their claims, with 
virtually no questions raised about their validity. With Agca’s Novem¬ 
ber 1982 naming of Bulgarians, the mass media began to report the 
Bulgarian Connection intensively. This reporting was carried out ex¬ 
clusively within the frame of the SHK model, and for most of the mass 
media no serious departures from this model occurred through the 
conclusion of the Rome trial in March 1986. 24 

Agca’s naming of the Bulgarians was the key fact that generated news 
coverage, providing the basis for reiterated details about the Bulgarians, 
explanations of the Bulgarian (and Soviet) motive, and speculation 
about the political implications of the charges, if confirmed. A major 
characteristic of these news reports was their sheer superficiality, with 
the charges never seriously examined but merely regurgitated and 
elaborated with odd facts and opinion, and with no departures from the 
SHK frame (and no hints of the possible relevance of an alternative 
frame). The charges constituted a form of vindication of the SHK 
model if taken at face value and presented superficially—i.e., if the 
media presentations never considered political convenience, prison 
conditions, possible deals, plausible deniability, etc* And this proce¬ 
dure—a reiteration of Agca claims, supplemented by extremely super¬ 
ficial pro-plot speculation—was the principal modality by which the 
mass media accepted and pushed the propaganda line, 

Newsweek provides a prototype of news coverage within the SHK 
framework in its article of January 3,1983, “The Plot to Kill Pope John 
Paul II.” The Bulgarian-Soviet motive as portrayed by SHK is reite¬ 
rated through quotes from congenial sources—“a precautionary and 
alternative solution to the invasion of Poland”—while nobody is quoted 
discussing costs and benefits, the nature of the Soviet leadership, or 
Western benefits from Agca’s confession. 25 In fact, Newsweek suggests 



156 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 

