deteriorated transportation system in Nicaragua is remarkable. Wag¬ 
ner also misses another distinction between Nicaragua and El Salva¬ 
dor; the former has an “unpopular draft,” whereas in the terror state 
of El Salvador there is no draft—instead there is press-ganging of 
young men into the army from the slums, refugee camps, and rural 
areas, while the young sons of the wealthy live the high life in San 
Salvador and Miami (much the same is true in Guatemala and Hon¬ 
duras). Wagneris double standard is also remarkable. In El Salvador 
in 1982 and 1984 there was far more severe censorship (including out¬ 
right murder), food shortages, a deteriorating transport system, and 
church opposition—and more pertinent, a complete exclusion of the 
“main opposition” and massive state terror—but these didn't make it 
apparent to CBS News that a free and open election was not in the 
cards in that U.S.-sponsored election. 107 

The Irish delegation and LASA, especially the latter, addressed these 
issues, gave evidence of having examined them seriously, and came up 
with conclusions sharply at odds with the U.S. government-media 
portrayals. LASA provided an extensive discussion of the Sandinista 
defense committees and the scope of the turba violence and interfer¬ 
ence with freedom of assembly, concluding that the total number of 
disruptive incidents reported was “quite small,” and that the most 
serious occurred before the official campaign began. “In spite of Daniel 
Ortega's unfortunate statement on these disruptions, there is no evi¬ 
dence that the FSLN had a coherent strategy of stimulating or orches¬ 
trating them” (p. 24). As regards the defense committees, LASA 
concluded that they did not seem to be functioning as a spying network 
and that there was no serious evidence that they were a force making 
for intimidation (p. 27). LASA makes two additional points ignored by 
the free press. One is that the electoral commission “placed paid adver¬ 
tisements in the press urging citizens to respect the rights of all political 
parties to hold rallies without interference” (p, 24). The second is that 
the Cruz rallies that were disrupted were held in violation of the elec¬ 
toral law, which requires permits for campaign rallies and promises 
police protection. “In other words, given their decision not to register, 
Cruz and the Coordinadora were deliberately campaigning outside of 
the legal framework of protections which had been created by the 
electoral law” (p. 25), LASA also compares the violence in the Nicarag¬ 
uan election with that elsewhere in the area and in the Nicaraguan 
context, concluding that “compared to other nations in the region and 


LEGITIMIZING VERSUS MEANINGLESS THIRD WORLD ELECTIONS i;i 


in the face of a war against the contras, such abuses are on a very small 
scale" (p. 28). 

LASA also discussed freedom of the press, which it regards as one 
of the election’s most troublesome features. It considers the imposition 
of press censorship to have been damaging to the election’s quality and 
credibility, even though the argument of the Sandinistas, that a country 
at war “can’t allow a newspaper which is the instrument of the enemy 
to publish its opinions freely” (Sergio Ramirez), is viewed as not wholly 
unreasonable. Nevertheless, while the censorship was also somewhat 
arbitrary and legalistic, LASA concluded that “The opposition could 
and did get its message out’’ (p. 26). And the finding overall was that 
the Nicaraguan election “by Latin American standards was a model of 
probity and fairness” (p. 32). 

The U.S. mass media did not concur, but it is striking how they avoid 
comparisons and data. The way in which the media can denounce 
restrictions on freedom of the press in Nicaragua after having totally 
ignored the question in El Salvador, where restrictions were far more 
severe, is remarkable. This process of dichotomization is so internalized 
that the writers use the double standard within the same article, appar¬ 
ently unaware of their own bias. In an article in the New York Times 
of March 12,1984, “Clear Choices in Salvador, Murky Plans in Nicara¬ 
gua,” Hedrick Smith regards the choices as “clear” in El Salvador, 
whereas in Nicaragua the problem is whether in an election the San¬ 
dinistas will “give up significant power and control.” Multiple parties 
from the far right to the center-right in El Salvador demonstrate clear 
choices, but a variety of parties from right to far left in Nicaragua didn’t 
cause Smith to perceive real choices there, although he didn’t explain 
why. It apparently never occurs to Smith that there is an issue of 
whether the army and United States “will give up power and control” 
(and their determination to fight to victory) by the electoral route in El 
Salvador. 

Are there essential freedoms and absence of coercion in El Salvador 
that are necessary for a truly free election? Hedrick Smith talks about 
substantive electoral conditions only in Nicaragua. He provides exten¬ 
sive detail on the trials of La Prensa, press censorship, the Sandinista 
monopoly of power, and limits allegedly imposed on opposition candi¬ 
dates in Nicaragua. Not a word, however, on death-squad and army 
murders of civilians in El Salvador or the Draconian laws of the state 
of siege. How many journalists have been killed in El Salvador? Papers 
closed? Radio stations blown up? Union leaders and political figures 
murdered? These questions are off the agenda in U.S.-staged elections, 
and Hedrick Smith ignores them. As a de facto spokesman for his 



132 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


government* the Times commentator uses doublethink with as much 
insouciance as Reagan and Shultz. 


