considers [the PRG] to be a parallel administration, 5 * failing to observe 
that it is not only “the Vietcong,” but also the Paris Agreements just 
signed by the United States government that assign to the PRG a status 
exactly parallel to that of the GVN. 147 In Newsweek, Stewart Alsop 



234 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


proclaimed that if the “marvelously elaborate” Nixon-Kissinger settle¬ 
ment “survives more or less intact, we will have won the war”—which 
would be true, under the Nixon-Kissinger interpretation, although 
under the evidently irrelevant terms of the Paris Agreements, the 
United States had abandoned its war aims and accepted the basic 
proposals of the Vietnamese enemy. Newsweek went on to explain in the 
same issue that Hanoi has now 

accepted the provision that north and south are divided by a 
sacrosanct demarcation line, thus tacitly acknowledging the legiti¬ 
macy of the Saigon regime. . . . Equally vital to the Nixon Ad¬ 
ministration was specific mention of the “sovereignty” of the 
Saigon government, and on this point, too, the U.S* had its way, 
Hanoi finally conceded that, in Kissinger's words, “there is an 
entity called South Vietnam.” In one important sense, the dispute 
over that question was what the war in Vietnam was all about. 143 

Again, utterly and transparently false in every respect, as a comparison 
with the text just quoted immediately demonstrates, although in accord 
with Kissinger's deceptive version of the agreements, taken as sac¬ 
rosanct by the loyal media. 

An honest and independent press would have announced the January 
agreements with headlines reading: “U.S. Announces Intention to Vio¬ 
late the Agreements Signed in Paris.” An informed press would have 
observed further that the Paris Agreements incorporate the principles 
rejected by the United States at Geneva twenty years earlier, as well 
as the essential principles of the NLF program of the early 1960s, which 
were similar to those advocated by Vietnamese quite generally and 
constituted the crucial fact that impelled the United States to escalate 
the war so as to block a political settlement among Vietnamese. The 
actual press simply adopted Washington's version of the agreements, 
never mentioning that this version contradicted them in every essential 
respect and thus guaranteed that the war would go on—as it did. Once 
again, the contribution of the media was to help implement further 
violence and suffering by adopting Washington's version of events—in 
this case, in the face of the fact that this version was, transparently, in 
flat contradiction to the documents readily at hand. One would have 
to search assiduously to discover a more blatant example of media 
subservience to state power. 

The aftermath was predictable, predicted in the “alternative press,” 
and similar to earlier occasions when the same factors were operative. 
As after Geneva 1954, the Communists, who had won a political victory 





THE INDOCHINA WARS (l): VIETNAM 235 


(on paper)* attempted to pursue “political struggle,” while the United 
States and its GVN client at once turned to military force to overturn 
the terms of the Paris Agreements. These facts were reported by the 
more serious journalists on the scene in Vietnam, notably Daniel South¬ 
erland* who observed from his extensive investigations that “the Saigon 
government has been guilty in by far the greatest number of cases of 
launching offensive operations into territory held by the other side,” 
assuming “that it has the right, despite the cease-fire,” to take back 
territory which it lost in 1972,” and giving many examples, as did 
others. 149 The U.S. government informed Congress cheerily that “the 
GVN has fared well during the post-cease-fire maneuvering,” adding 
“770 hamlets to the list of those over which it has dominant control” 
after the agreements—and in violation of them, a fact that passed 
without notice. The GVN thus added one million people to the areas 
of its control, while expending sixteen times as much ammunition as 
the enemy and using the newly provided U.S, equipment, as intended, 
for massive military operations, including extensive bombardment of 
PRG areas to prevent refugees from returning to them as provided by 
the agreements. 150 The media either blamed the Communists, or some¬ 
times the GVN as well, but not the United States, which had an¬ 
nounced at once its intention to disrupt the agreements and now 
publicly expressed its pleasure in the military actions that successfully 
achieved this objective. 

When the North Vietnamese finally responded to U.S.-GVN vio¬ 
lence, the GVN quickly collapsed, leading to outrage in the U.S. 
government and media—which still persists—over this dramatic dem¬ 
onstration of Communist iniquity, which proves that their intentions all 
along were to destroy the free and independent government of South 
Vietnam and to reduce its people to Communist tyranny, thus further 
entrenching the principle that “Communists cannot be trusted.” 

This useful lesson, firmly established by media complicity in trans¬ 
parent government deceit, has, not surprisingly, been applied in subse¬ 
quent efforts by the U.S. government to gain its ends by violence. One 
dramatic example was featured in the media in August 1987, when the 
Central American presidents confounded Washington strategy by 
adopting a political settlement that undermined the familiar U.S. reli¬ 
