The murder of Archbishop Oscar Amulfo Romero two weeks ago 
and the killing of 30 at his funeral may have benefited, rather than 
hurt, the ruling civilian-military junta, in the view of many diplo¬ 
mats, businessmen and Government officials. 

The extreme right is being blamed for the killing of the Arch- 


WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS 53 


bishop and the extreme left is being blamed for the shooting and 
bombing that turned the crowded central plaza into chaos as 
Archbishop Romero was being eulogized, 

“It’s not so much that the junta gained/* said Robert E* White* 
the United States Ambassador to El Salvador* “but that its oppo¬ 
nents on the extreme right and left have lost prestige. The net 
result is a boost in prestige for the junta/' 

We may note how the title of the article transforms the murder of the 
leader of the dissident forces (and then of his followers at the funeral) 
from a moral issue deserving outrage into a question of political advan¬ 
tage, and turns that against the rebels. It would be hard to imagine the 
New York Times publishing an article on Popieluszko headed “Slaying 
in Poland Backfires on Solidarity Movement,* 5 featuring perhaps the 
playing up by the official press of demonstrator aggressiveness or vio¬ 
lence. Note also how the question of identifying the killer of Romero, 
and the governments obligation to seek justice, has been pushed into 
the background. Finally, there is the statement that “the extreme left 
is being blamed 5 * for the deaths in the plaza* Use of the passive voice 
allows Treaster to avoid specification of just who is blaming the ex¬ 
treme left* He mentions as his sources for the article as a whole “many 
diplomats, businessmen and Government officials”~he doesn*t even 
pretend to have talked to ordinary Salvadorans or church representa¬ 
tives—but his only citation near the statement that “the extreme left 
is being blamed" is the then-U.S* ambassador, Robert White. By relying 
only on government handouts and carefully avoiding readily available 
conflicting evidence and alternative views, the Times once again found 
the means of applying the usual formula of a deadly right offsetting a 
deadly left, with the junta favored by the U.S. government once more 
placed in the middle—with enhanced prestige! 


2.3.3. Misrepresentation of 
Romero’s views 

As we noted earlier, Romero was unequivocal in laying the blame for 
the violence in El Salvador on the army and security forces, and he 
viewed the left and popular groupings as victims provoked into self- 
defense by violence and injustice. The peoples 5 organizations, he told 
Carter, are “fighting to defend their most fundamental human rights* 5 
against a military establishment that “knows only how to repress the 



54 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


people and defend the interests of the Salvadorean oligarchy.” And in 
his di^ry, Romero completely repudiated the idea that the army was 
reacting to somebody else’s violence—the security forces are instru¬ 
ments “of a general program of annihilation of those on the left, who 
by themselves would not commit violence or further it were it not for 
social injustice that they want to do away with.” 33 Thus Joseph 
Treasteris statement on the front page of the New York Times that 
Romero “had criticized both the extreme right and the extreme left for 
widespread killing and torture in El Salvador” (Mar. 31, 1980) is 
straightforward lying: Romero never accused the left of torture or 
widespread killing, he never equated the right and the left, and he was 
quite clear that the government (an agent of the right) was the primary 
killer. In this respect, Romero’s perception, essentially the same as that 
privately conveyed to the press by the U.S. government, was grossly 
falsified in public by both the government and press. 34 

Interestingly, a year later, in an article marking the anniversary of 
the assassination of Archbishop Romero, Edward Schumacher, of the 
Times, noted that under Romero’s successor. Archbishop Rivera y 
Damas, “the church has moved to a more centrist position in the civil 
war between the Government and the guerrillas.” 35 Of course, if the 
church now takes a centrist position, as opposed to its position under 
Romero, this constitutes an admission that the theme played by 
Treaster and the Times a year previously of an even-handed Romero 
was a lie (which it was). Is it possible that the Times always finds the 
church in the middle and is lying one year later as well? The question 
must remain open, as his successor has been much more circumspect 
than Romero. The willingness of the right wing and the army to murder 
people like Romero might have affected Archbishop Rivera y Damas’s 
ability to speak his mind freely and forced public caution. The point 
does not arise for Schumacher and the Times . 36 


2.3*4* The loss of interest in 
responsibility at the top 

With Popieluszko, the media tried hard to establish that there was 
knowledge of and responsibility for the crime at higher levels of the 
Polish government. Soviet interest and possible involvement were also 
regularly invoked. With Romero, in contrast, no such questions were 
raised or pressed. 
