cluded from the mass media. Facts were selected that fit the dominant 
frame; others were passed by even if they bore on the validity of its 
premises. 2 At the same time* the dominant sources* who had been 



144 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


allowed to monopolize mass-media space, complained bitterly that their 
voices could not be heard over the din of Soviet propaganda. When the 
legal proceeding brought against the Bulgarians in Italy was lost after 
a lengthy trial, this was rationalized by the media as far as could be 
done. No serious retrospectives were entertained, and, without resolv¬ 
ing the contradictions, the story was then dropped. 

What makes the Bulgarian Connection so apt an illustration of the 
value of a propaganda model is that there was no credible case for a 
Bulgarian Connection from the very beginning, and long before the 
Rome trial it had taken on a truly comic aspect. But the mass media 
played it straight to the bitter end- An analogous sequence carried out 
in Moscow, with the West as the target—with a half-crazed criminal, 
after seventeen months in a Soviet prison and some friendly sessions 
with the KGB and a prosecutor, implicating employees of the American 
embassy in a conspiracy to murder, and subsequently changing his 
testimony on a daily basis—would have been hooted off the stage in the 
West without anyone even bothering to look at alleged evidence. The 
Bulgarian Connection, however, although no less absurd, met the crite¬ 
rion of utility. 

The case began when Mehmet Ali Agca shot and seriously injured 
Pope John Paul II in St. Peteris Square on May 13, 1981. Agca was a 
Turkish rightist and assassin long associated with the Gray Wolves, an 
affiliate of the extreme right-wing Nationalist Action party. Initial 
Western news reports pointed out that Agca was a wanted criminal who 
had escaped from a Turkish prison in 1979, and that his durable politi¬ 
cal affiliations had been with the Fascist right. His motives in shooting 
the pope were unclear, Agca J s friends were violently anti-Communist, 
so that, at first, pinning the crime on the East seemed unpromising. 

Two factors allowed a KGB-Bulgarian plot to be developed. The 
first was that in his travels through Europe in the Gray Wolves under¬ 
ground, which carried him through twelve different countries, Agca had 
stayed for a period in Bulgaria. Turkish drug dealers, who had connec¬ 
tions with the Gray Wolves, also participated in the drug trade in 
Bulgaria, There were, therefore, some “links” between Agca and Bul¬ 
garians, minimal facts that would eventually be put to good use. 

The second factor was Western elite needs and the closely associated 
flare-up of a carefully stoked anti-Communist fervor in the West. At 
the first meeting of the Jonathan Institute, in Jerusalem, in July 1979, 
at which a large Western political and media contingent were present 
(including Claire Sterling, George Will, George Bush, and Robert 
Moss), 3 the main theme pressed by Israeli Prime Minister Menahem 
Begin in his opening address, and by many others at the conference, was 



THE KGB-BULGARIAN PLOT TO KILL THE POPE 145 


the importance and utility of pressing the terrorism issue and of tying 
terrorism to the Soviet Union, 4 Claire Sterling did this in her 1981 
volume The Terror Network, which became the bible of the Reagan 
administration and the international right wing, and elevated Sterling 
to the status of number one mass-media expert on that subject. Terror¬ 
ism and Soviet evil were the centerpieces of the Reagan administra¬ 
tion's propaganda campaign that began in 1981, designed to support its 
planned arms increase, placement of new missiles in Europe, and inter¬ 
ventionist policies in the Third World. Thus the shooting of the pope 
by Agca in May 1981 occurred at a time when important Western 
interests were looking for ways to tie the Soviet Union to “international 
terrorism.” 5 


4.1. THE STERLING-HENZE- 
KALB MODEL 

Although the initial media reaction to the shooting was that the roots 
of the act would seem to lie in Turkish right-wing ideology and politics, 
some rightists immediately seized the opportunity to locate the origins 
of the plot in the Soviet bloc. Only six days after the assassination 
attempt, the Italian secret-service organization SISMI issued a docu¬ 
ment which claimed that the attack had been announced by a Soviet 
official at a meeting of the Warsaw Pact powers in Bucharest, Romania, 
and that Agca had been trained in the Soviet Union. Subsequently, this 
“information” was shown to have been fabricated by SISMI or one of 
its intelligence sources, but it entered the stream of allegations about 
the plot in a book published in West Germany and via further citations 
and leaks. 6 

The Reader's Digest saw the propaganda opportunity presented by 
the assassination attempt quite early, and hired both Paul Henze, a 
longtime CIA officer and propaganda specialist, and Claire Sterling to 
investigate the topic. Sterling's September 1982 article in the Reader's 
Digest, “The Plot to Kill the Pope,” was the most important initiator 
of the Bulgarian Connection, and its ideas and those of Paul Henze 
formed the basis for the NBC-TV program “The Man Who Shot the 
Pope—A Study in Terrorism,” narrated by Marvin Kalb and first aired 
on September 21, 1982. 
