

1,6, DI CH OTOMIZ ATION AND 
PROPAGANDA CAMPAIGNS 

The five filters narrow the range of news that passes through the gates, 
and even more sharply limit what can become “big news,” subject to 
sustained news campaigns. By definition, news from primary establish¬ 
ment sources meets one major filter requirement and is readily accom¬ 
modated by the mass media. Messages from and about dissidents and 
weak, unorganized individuals and groups, domestic and foreign, are at 
an initial disadvantage in sourcing costs and credibility, and they often 
do not comport with the ideology or interests of the gatekeepers and 
other powerful parties that influence the filtering process. 117 

Thus, for example, the torture of political prisoners and the attack 
on trade unions in Turkey will be pressed on the media only by human- 
rights activists and groups that have little political leverage. The U.S. 
government supported the Turkish martial-law government from its 
inception in 1980, and the U-S, business community has been warm 
toward regimes that profess fervent anticommunism, encourage foreign 
investment, repress unions, and loyally support U.S. foreign policy (a 
set of virtues that are frequently closely linked). Media that chose to 
feature Turkish violence against their own citizenry would have had to 
go to extra expense to find and check out information sources; they 
would elicit flak from government, business, and organized right-wing 
flak machines, and they might be looked upon with disfavor by the 
corporate community (including advertisers) for indulging in such a 
quixotic interest and crusade. They would tend to stand alone in focus¬ 
ing on victims that from the standpoint of dominant American interests 
were unworthy . 118 

In marked contrast, protest over political prisoners and the violation 
of the rights of trade unions in Poland was seen by the Reagan adminis¬ 
tration and business elites in 1981 as a noble cause, and, not coinciden¬ 
tally, as an opportunity to score political points. Many media leaders 
and syndicated columnists felt the same way. Thus information and 



32 manufacturing consent 


strong opinions on human-rights violations in Poland could be obtained 
from official sources in Washington* and reliance on Polish dissidents 
would not elicit flak from the U.S. government or the flak machines. 
These victims would be generally acknowledged by the managers of the 
filters to be wonky .„ The mass media never explain why Andrei Sa¬ 
kharov is worthy and Jose Luis Massera* in Uruguay* is unworthy—the 
attention and general dichotomization occur “naturally” as a result of 
the working of the filters* but the result is the same as if a commissar 
had instructed the media: “Concentrate on the victims of enemy powers 
and forget about the victims of friends.” 119 

Reports of the abuses of worthy victims not only pass through the 
filters; they may also become the basis of sustained propaganda cam¬ 
paigns. If the government or corporate community and the media feel 
that a story is useful as well as dramatic* they focus on it intensively 
and use it to enlighten the public- This was true, for example* of the 
shooting down by the Soviets of the Korean airliner KAL 007 in early 
September 1983, which permitted an extended campaign of denigration 
of an official enemy and greatly advanced Reagan administration arms 
plans. As Bernard Gwertzman noted complacently in the New York 
Times of August 31* 1984* U.S. officials "assert that worldwide criticism 
of the Soviet handling of the crisis has strengthened the United States 
in its relations with Moscow,” In sharp contrast, the shooting down by 
Israel of a Libyan civilian airliner in February 1973 led to no outcry in 
the West* no denunciations for “cold-blooded murder*” 120 and no boy¬ 
cott. This difference in treatment was explained by the New York Times 
precisely on the grounds of utility: “No useful purpose is served by an 
acrimonious debate over the assignment of blame for the downing of 
a Libyan airliner in the Sinai peninsula last week.” 121 There was a very 
“useful purpose” served by focusing on the Soviet act* and a massive 
propaganda campaign ensued. 122 

Propaganda campaigns in general have been closely attuned to elite 
interests. The Red scare of 1919-20 served well to abort the union¬ 
organizing drive that followed World War I in the steel and other 
industries. The Trutnan-McCarthy Red scare helped inaugurate the 
Cold War and the permanent war economy, and it also served to 
weaken the progressive coalition of the New Deal years. The chronic 
focus on the plight of Soviet dissidents, on enemy killings in Cambodia* 
and on the Bulgarian Connection helped weaken the Vietnam syn¬ 
drome, justify a huge arms buildup and a more aggressive foreign 
policy, and divert attention from the upward redistribution of income 
that was the heart of Reagan's domestic economic program. 123 The 
recent propaganda-disinformation attacks on Nicaragua have been 



A propaganda model 33 


needed to avert eyes from the savagery of the war in El Salvador and 
to justify the escalating U.S. investment in counterrevolution in Central 
America. 

Conversely, propaganda campaigns will not be mobilized where vic¬ 
timization, even though massive, sustained, and dramatic, fails to meet 
the test of utility to elite interests. Thus, while the focus on Cambodia 
