responsible for phase I of the genocide with their “careless” policies 
and who are now supporting Pol Pot, Shawcross rationalizes the cur¬ 
rent support for Pol Pot as a natural response to Vietnamese actions. 
Given Hanoi’s invasion of Cambodia and subsequent conduct, he ex- 



294 manufacturing consent 


plains* China and the ASEAN countries of Southeast Asia (not to speak 
of their ‘‘Western partners”) were bound “to seek to apply all possible 
forms of pressure upon Hanoi” to renounce its intentions, and “the 
Vietnamese could have predicted that such pressures would include 
support for the Khmer Rouge.” Thus the Vietnamese are to blame if 
China and the United States support Pol Pot* along with such dedicated 
advocates of human rights and the strict reliance on peaceful means as 
Indonesia and Thailand* Such analysis is* however* not extended to the 
Vietnamese* who are always carrying out cold-blooded strategies in a 
world without threats from China or the United States* threats that 
might allow us to “predict” (and thus implicitly exonerate) these strate¬ 
gies* According to Shawcross* “Vietnam's conduct since its invasion of 
Cambodia rarely suggested that it wished to see a compromise in which 
the Khmer Rouge were removed as a viable force in Cambodia—which 
was what the ASEAN countries and their Western partners insisted was 
their aim*” “It is impossible to predict whether any such suggestion 
[from Hanoi] would have been accepted by the Chinese or the ASEAN 
countries* but the point is that it was never made*” Shawcross asserts 
without qualification . 114 Hanoi has repeatedly offered to withdraw in 
favor of an indigenous regime* the only condition being the exclusion 
of the top Khmer Rouge leadership. Whether these offers were serious 
or not* we do not know* as they have been dismissed by the Deng- 
Reagan alliance and, with more vacillation, the ASEAN countries* 
These rejections* in favor of continued support for Pol Pot* have not 
been featured in the media, which would hardly surprise a rational 
observer. But these facts are hardly supportive of Shawcross’s analysis* 
to say the least. 

In a further effort to cast the blame on the approved enemy, Shaw¬ 
cross asserts that the Vietnamese “placed more confidence in the tor¬ 
turers than in their victims, that many of those people were actually 
being promoted by the new order into positions of new authority over 
them.” As his sole evidence, he cites a story, told twice in his book, 
about an old woman he met in Cambodia “who described with great 
passion how the Khmer Rouge murderer of her son was living* unpun¬ 
ished, in the neighboring village.” He repeated the same story in the 
New York Review of Books , eliciting a letter from Ben Kieman* who 
accompanied him when this alleged incident took place (and was his 
interpreter), Kiernan cited the tape of the woman's statement, which 
reveals that she had simply said that the murderer had “run away” to 
a neighboring “district*” suggesting* as Kiernan notes, that he feared 
punishment* but not that he had been “promoted” to “new authority.” 
Confronted with this evidence, Shawcross maintained his position 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (ll): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 295 


while retreating to the claim that some officials he met “seemed rather 
unpleasant,* 3 which suffices to prove the point, according to his logic, 115 
These examples are quite typical. 116 


6.2.9. Summary 

Summarizing, prior to “the decade of the genocide, 3 * media treatment 
of Cambodia was as predicted by the propaganda model, and the same 
is true, quite dramatically, during the two phases of this terrible period 
and since. During phase I, refugee testimony was considered uninter¬ 
esting, and little is known today apart from the fact that there was 
obviously vast slaughter and destruction; this phase does not enter the 
record as a “holocaust 3 * or exercise in “genocide,* 3 and the source is 
forgotten. During phase II, the myth of the “gentle land* 3 was extended 
through 1975, and the U.S. role and responsibility for what then took 
place was also quite commonly effaced, although some did not sink to 
this level of vulgarity. Refugee testimony was eagerly sought, although 
only if it lent support to the STV, and evaluations by State Department 
specialists and other knowledgeable commentators that gave a more 
nuanced (and in retrospect, essentially accurate) picture were dismissed 
as lacking utility. There was massive outrage, reaching its peak in early 
1977 when the death toil was still well below that of phase I, with a 
record of deception that is highly illuminating. 117 As something like the 
STV came to be realized in 1977—78, its horrors were downplayed in 
official government circles, and subsequent U.S. support for Pol Pot 
arouses little notice. 

Phase III proceeded along a dual course. In a fanciful reconstruction 
that maintains the level of integrity shown throughout, it is alleged that 
“left-wing skepticism 3 * so dominated Western opinion and governments 
that there was “silence 3 * throughout the DK period; the wide accept¬ 
ance of this thesis, despite the quality of the evidence provided and its 
manifest absurdity* counts as yet another example of how readily the 
most implausible contentions can become doctrine, as long as they are 
serviceable. In Indochina, a new phase of Western concern about the 
victimization of Cambodia began, with outrage now directed not 
against Pol Pot but against the new oppressors who overthrew him. The 
United States took a leading role in orchestrating the new concern, 
which combined Chinese and U.S. interest in “bleeding Vietnam* 3 with 
a renewed exhibition of the Western conscience, properly bounded to 
