Charles Mohr, whom Freedom House singles out for “perhaps the 
consistently best reporting from Vietnam," reported that “in towns 
such as Hue, Vinhlong, Bentre and Mytho appalling destruction was 
wrought when encircled allied forces took the decision to destroy the 
attacking Vietcong forces by destroying the places they had occupied." 
He quotes an American official in Saigon as stating: “The Government 
won the recent battles, but it is important to consider how they won. 
At first the Vietcong had won and held everything in some towns except 
the American military compound and a South Vietnamese position-” 126 
By “the Government," he means the reader to understand the GVN, 
who “won" thanks to U,S. firepower and troops. 

As in this example, the U.S. government claim that the Tet offensive 
was a military defeat for the Communists was widely reported, although 
the U.S, government official's perception of an initial Viet Cong victory 
goes well beyond the typical media accounts in the crime of “pessi¬ 
mism." “Journalists generally accepted the official claim that Tet was 
a military defeat for the North Vietnamese and NLF," Daniel Halim 
concludes in his review of the press and television; for example, Walter 
Cronkite, who said at once over CBS—on February 14—that “first, and 
simplest, the Vietcong suffered a military defeat," 127 Clear and forth¬ 
right- 

These facts do not comport well with what remains of the Freedom 
House thesis: the charge that until late February, the media portrayed 
the enemy’s defeat as “a defeat for the allies" in “clamourous shouts," 
only conceding from late February in a “whisper” that this was not 
quite accurate, television being the worst offender, with Walter Cron- 
kite the arch-criminal. 128 It was this gross incompetence or malevolence 
that illustrates most dramatically the “mindless readiness ... to believe 
the worst of the government or of authority in general." In the real 
world, the facts were quite the opposite, and the last remnants of 
the Freedom House thesis thus disappear, apart from the charge, 
to be evaluated in the appendix, that the reporting was technically in¬ 
competent. 

Some would contend that the issue of “how they won," which con¬ 
cerned the American official cited earlier, is as important as “who 
won" in evaluating the significance of the Tet offensive. This idea 
never penetrated the minds of Braestrup or his Freedom House as¬ 
sociates, however, at the time or in their study. Consider political 
scientist Milton Sacks, a specialist on Vietnam and a GVN adviser, 
thanked for “providing historical perspective" for the Freedom 
House Study (I, xxiii). In February 1968, he wrote, with no further 
comment: V 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (i): VIETNAM 223 


In conventional terms > it now seems clear that the Communists 
have suffered a military defeat in their Tet offensive* They have 
expended the lives of thousands of their soldiers without securing 
a single province or district town of significance* 129 

U.S. officials, in contrast* were impressed with the fact that the NLF 
and NVA occupied vast areas previously thought to be “controlled/ 5 
wreaked havoc with the pacification program, and were dislodged only 
by a further and still more violent U.S. attack on the civil society of 
South Vietnam* It was feared that it might not be an easy task to 
convince the populace that the Communists were to blame for the 
slaughter and destruction by U.S. forces. The problem, as reported 
from Hue by Marc Riboud of Le Monde in April, was that the popula¬ 
tion appeared to compare ARVN behavior unfavorably with that of the 
NVA or NLF* while the deepest bitterness and resentment was directed 
against the Americans, whose “blind and systematic bombardment” 
had turned Hue into “an assassinated city”; this reaction may have also 
been in part a residue of the deep bitterness and resentment left by the 
U.S.-backed ARVN conquest of Hue a few months earlier* 130 An IVS 
worker quoted in Newsweek said: “As difficult as this may be to believe, 
not a single Vietnamese I have met in Saigon or in the Delta blames 
the Viet Cong for the events of the past two weeks/ 5 and in its last issue 
of the Tet period, Newsweek reported from Hue, with the same surprise 
at this inexplicable reaction, that 

Curiously, moreover, few of [the population] point an accusing 
finger at the North Vietnamese* “When the NVA were here,” said 
one student, “they were polite and well-disciplined, totally dif¬ 
ferent from the government troops, the Americans, or even the 
Vietcong.” 

“The hope is that the Vietnamese people will blame the communists 
rather than the Americans for whatever damage is being done/ 5 Don 
Webster reported from Hue on February 12 in the midst of the recon¬ 
quest of the city by the U.S. Marines. Two days earlier, John Lengel 
of AP wrote that 

It is still impossible to gauge the breadth of the damage. . . * But 
few seasoned observers see the devastation of Hue backfiring on 
the communists. They see as the greatest hope a massive and 
instant program of restoration underlined by a careful psychologi¬ 
cal warfare program pinning the blame on the communists. 131 



224 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


Braestrup places the word “devastation” in italics as an illustration of 
