media well attuned to state policy. The two assaults on Laura Pinto and the 
detention of the twelve members of the Mothers were totally suppressed by 
the New York Times and its confreres. There was not a word in the quality 
papers when a member of the “Mothers of the Disappeared” who had herself 
been a victim of the atrocities of Duarte’s security forces was denied entry to 
the United States in March 1987, to visit several small towns where she had 
been invited to speak on the occasion of International Women’s Day. See 
Noam Chomsky, The Culture of Terrorism (Boston: South End Press, 1988). 
The attention that the Times mentions as a constraint on Polish violence was 
not available to protect an unworthy victim. 

11. For a review of Times editorials on El Salvador in the 1980s, exculpating 
the state terrorists throughout, see Noam Chomsky, “U.S. Polity and Society,” 
in Thomas Walker, ed., Reagan versus the Sandinistas (Boulder, Colo.: West- 
view, 1987), pp. 295-96. 

12. The press may also have been constrained by the fact that reporters who 
dig deeply and provide accounts unfavorable to the military regimes in Latin 
America may be barred from the country, or even murdered. Western reporters 
are very rarely physically threatened—let alone murdered—in Poland, the 
Soviet Union, Cuba, or Nicaragua. They are often threatened and sometimes 
murdered in El Salvador, Guatemala, and other U.S. clients in Latin America. 
This irony is not commented upon in the free press, nor are the effects of this 
potential and actual violence against dissident reporters on the possibilities of 
honest reporting. This point is discussed further in chapter 3, pp. 97-98. 

13. Penny Lernoux, Cry of the People (New York: Doubleday, 1980), p. 73. 

14. James R. Brockman, The Word Remains: A Life of Oscar Romero (Mary- 
knoll, N.Y.: Orbis, 1982), p. 11. 

15. We discuss this link later in this section. 

16. Carter sent former New York mayor Robert Wagner to persuade the pope 
to rein in Romero, which the pope then tried to do. See Raymond Bonner, 
Weakness and Deceit (New York: Times Books, 1984), p. 176. The provincial 
of the Jesuit order in Central America, Father C6sar Jerez, was called to Rome 
shortly after to explain the Romero letter. Father Jerez, who had fled from 
Guatemala after the military had threatened his life, was very close to Arch¬ 
bishop Romero. Subsequently he was forced to flee El Salvador as well and 
is now a refugee in Nicaragua, where he is rector of the Universidad Cen- 


troamericana, unable to return to the two “fledgling democracies” except for 
brief (and dangerous) visits. 

17. Quoted in Bonner, Weakness and Deceit , p. 172. 

18. On September 27, 1981, Alan Riding wrote in the New York Times that 
“under the Carter administration, United States officials said security forces 
