One local observer said that years of terror and oppression against 
local organizations had demobilized the whole rural population: 
“Four CUC [peasant league] members were killed in this village 
alone* Now it would be very difficult to organize any kind of 
group.” Civil patrols, police and army checkpoints on highways, 
and the need for travel permits for residents of the model villages 
impeded free movement* In the rural areas the civil patrols dis¬ 
couraged gatherings because people feared being reported* 23 

It was noted by many observers of the Guatemalan elections that 
although the big issues in that country were land distribution and 
reform and human rights, no political candidates discussed or ad¬ 
vocated either land reform, or restructuring the military and forcing an 
accounting of tens of thousands of “disappearances*” One Christian 
Democratic adviser explained to the law group that “We Christian 
Democrats haven't raised such issues because this isn*t the moment to 
start a confrontation with either the army or the private sector.” 24 

In short, despite the “momentary improvement in the conditions of 
free speech” that occurred during the election campaign, Guatemala 
did not meet the first condition of a free election* The rural masses were 
under army discipline and traumatized by mass killings and the absence 
of any vestige of rule of law, and the candidates were unable to raise 
openly the fundamental issues of the society* 

Free speech and rights of assembly were constrained in Nicaragua 
in 1984 by social pressures and threats and by a state of siege that had 
been terminated some six months prior to the November 1984 election. 
Very important differences existed, however, between the Nicaraguan 
constraints and those prevailing in El Salvador and Guatemala, Most 
important, in Nicaragua the army and police did not regularly seize 
alleged subversives, and torture and murder them. Mutilated bodies 
have not been put on public display as a part of the system of public 
education* What the law group called the “constant, overt political 
terror” in Guatemala, based on “numerous documented massacres of 
whole villages,” and what the former Salvadoran official Leonel Gomez 
called the state of “fearful passivity” prevalent in El Salvador, did not 
apply to Nicaragua. In Nicaragua, in 1984, dissidents were able to speak 


LEGITIMIZING VERSUS MEANINGLESS THIRD WORLD ELECTIONS 97 


freely without fear of murder, and the LASA group noted that “Every 
member of our delegation was approached at least once by an irate 
citizen as we walked around Managua and other cities. Several of these 
encounters turned into heated arguments between the individual who 

had approached us and passers-by who joined the discussion-These 

people did not feel intimidated/* 25 

Freedom of assembly in Nicaragua was somewhat limited by harass¬ 
ment, but, once again, it was not ruled out by state terror, as was the 
case in El Salvador and Guatemala. The LASA delegation examined 
in detail the charges of Sandinista harassment of opposition-group 
meetings and found them largely unfounded, concluding that the con¬ 
testing parties “were able to hold the vast majority of their rallies 
unimpeded by pro-FSLN demonstrations. . . .” 26 

Our conclusion is that the first basic condition of a free election was - 
partially met in Nicaragua, but was not met at all in El Salvador and 
Guatemala. 


3.2*2. Freedom of the press. 

In El Salvador, the only substantial newspapers critical of the govern¬ 
ment, La Cronica del Pueblo and El Independiente —neither by any 
means radical papers—were closed in July 1980 and January 1981, re¬ 
spectively, the first because its top editor and two employees were 
murdered and mutilated by the security forces, the second because the 
army arrested its personnel and destroyed its plant. The church paper 
and radio station were repeatedly shut down by bombing attacks. No 
paper or station representing the principal opposition has been able to 
operate except clandestinely. Over thirty journalists have been mur¬ 
dered in El Salvador since the revolutionary junta took power. An 
intensified campaign against the press occurred just prior to the 1982 
election. On March 10, a death list of thirty-five journalists was cir¬ 
culated by a “death squad,” and on March 18 the mutilated bodies of 
four Dutch journalists were recovered. 27 None of the murders of jour¬ 
nalists in El Salvador was ever “solved”—they were essentially murders 
carried out under the auspices of the state. 

In Guatemala, forty-eight journalists were murdered between 1978 
and I9S5, 2S and many others have been kidnapped and threatened. 
These killings, kidnappings, and threats have been a primary means of 
control of the media. As in El Salvador, nobody has yet been ap¬ 
prehended and tried for any of these crimes, which must be viewed as 





9 & MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


murders carried out by the state or with state approval. There are no 
papers or radio or television stations in Guatemala that express the 
views of the rebels or the majority Indian population or the lower 
