the secrecy of the ballot and absence of a checkable ID card* so that 
there would have been no way to implement a threat even if one had 
been made. It suppresses the fact that the Nicaraguan army did not 
regularly murder even “counterrevolutionaries/ 1 whereas the Salvado¬ 
ran and Guatemalan armies murdered numerous people who weren't 
“revolutionaries” but were somehow in the way. In shorty propaganda 
could hardly be more brazen. 

Time's alleged “fact/ 1 that “many” people feared the removal of the 
rationing card* is contested by LASA, which states that “in our inter¬ 
views in many neighborhoods in several cities, we found no evidence 
that ration cards were being held back or withdrawn , . . for any 
reason,” They note that there were five reports filed with the supreme 
electoral council alleging intimidation by threat of withdrawal of ration 
cards, “but none of these allegations were sustained upon investiga¬ 
tion” (p. 27). Time does not indicate the source of its evidence and fails 
to provide a single illustration of the “many” cases. 

We noted earlier that Stephen Kinzer cited more claims of coercion 
in the Nicaraguan than the Guatemalan elections, a remarkable jour¬ 
nalistic achievement, given the unchallenged facts about the actual 
scale and character of repression in the two states. His playing down 
of state terror in Guatemala as a basic factor affecting the quality of the 
election in all its dimensions—the ability of candidates to run, freedom 
of speech and press, the existence of intermediate groups, endemic fear, 
and the meaning of turnout—amounts to massive deceit. His Nicarag¬ 
uan coverage also involved large-scale misrepresentation. He did not 
point out the absence of mass killings, and he failed to mention the 
absence of a coercion package—no transparent boxes, no requirement 
that an ID card be stamped, and no legal obligation to vote. Kinzer's 
one notice of the voting requirement in his fourteen articles on the 
election amounts to serious deception—he quotes a voter as follows: 
“ Tve always voted because it is always required/ he said. ‘Of course, 
the law says one thing, but after a while one realizes that voting is part 
of patriotism, and patriotism leads to long life, 5 ” 98 Kinzer's source 
implies but doesn't say directly that voting is not legally required in 
Nicaragua, and this murky statement—the closest Kinzer ever comes 



LEGITIMIZING VERSUS MEANINGLESS THIRD WORLD ELECTIONS 125 


to acknowledging the absence of a voting requirement—is counter¬ 
balanced by his respondent's suggestion that voting may be based on 
some kind of threat. 

Both the Irish and LASA delegations stressed the superior protection 
of secrecy in the balloting* which* in LASA's words* was "meticulously 
designed to minimize the potential for abuses'' (p. 15). They also em¬ 
phasized the fact that voting was not required by law* and that* contrary 
to the U.S. government propaganda expounded by Time and other 
media entities* the coercive elements in getting out the vote were small. 
Human-rights abuses by the government that contribute to an environ¬ 
ment of fear* LASA pointed out* were “on a very small scale" when 
“compared to other nations in the region ..(p. 28). In fact* they note 
that fear in Nicaragua is directed more to the United States and the 
contras than to the government in Managua. 


3*6*5. The “main opposition” to the 

fore 

As we saw* in El Salvador and Guatemala* the fact that the insurgents 
were off the ballot did not faze the U.S. media one bit. Neither did 
Duarte's acknowledgment in 1981 that “the masses were with the guer¬ 
rillas” when he joined the junta a year earlier (which would clearly 
make them a “main opposition”). 99 Nor were the media affected by the 
army's murder of the opposition leadership in both El Salvador and 
Guatemala. In El Salvador, the exclusion of the rebels was part of the 
U.S. government's electoral plan; they were* therefore* not a “main 
opposition*” and the debarment and even murder of their leaders did 
not compromise election quality. In the Nicaraguan case* in sharp 
contrast* the U.S. government worked with a different frame—the 
exclusion of its sponsored rebels and any other candidates was a serious 
matter that threatened the quality of the election. The media followed 
like good little doggies (lap* rather than watch-). 

The central dramatic propaganda line for the Nicaraguan election 
pressed by U.S. officials was the alleged struggle of Arturo Cruz to 
induce the Sandinistas to create an open system in which he would be 
able to compete fairly, the failure of the “Marxists-Leninists” to make 
adequate concessions, Cruz's refusal to compete, and the subsequent 
“exclusion” of the “main opposition.” Cruz, however* was a “main 
opposition' 5 only in the propaganda construct of the U.S. government 
and mass media. A longtime expatriate (who now concedes that he was 



126 manufacturing consent 


on the CIA payroll), with no mass base in Nicaragua, Cruz would 
almost certainly have done poorly in a free election. 100 There is good 
reason to believe that Cruz never intended to run, but that he and his 
sponsors had held out this possibility precisely to allow the propaganda 
frame to be used effectively. 101 

The mass media focused on the Cruz drama heavily and uncritically. 
