
Another structural relationship of importance is the media compa¬ 
nies 5 dependence on and ties with government. The radio-TV compa¬ 
nies and networks all require government licenses and franchises and 
are thus potentially subject to government control or harassment. This 
technical legal dependency has been used as a club to discipline the 
media* and media policies that stray too often from an establishment 
orientation could activate this threat. 36 The media protect themselves 
from this contingency by lobbying and other political expenditures, the 
cultivation of political relationships, and care in policy. The political 
ties of the media have been impressive. Table 1-3 shows that fifteen of 
ninety-five outside directors of ten of the media giants are former 
government officials, and Peter Dreier gives a similar proportion in his 
study of large newspapers. 37 In television* the revolving-door flow of 
personnel between regulators and the regulated firms was massive dur¬ 
ing the years when the oligopolistic structure of the media and networks 
was being established. 38 

The great media also depend on the government for more general 
policy support. All business firms are interested in business taxes, inter¬ 
est rates, labor policies* and enforcement and nonenforcement of the 
antitrust laws. GE and Westinghouse depend on the government to 
subsidize their nuclear power and military research and development* 
and to create a favorable climate for their overseas sales. The Reader’s 
Digest* Time, Newsweek^ and movie- and television-syndication sellers 
also depend on diplomatic support for their rights to penetrate foreign 
cultures with U.S. commercial and value messages and interpretations 
of current affairs. The media giants, advertising agencies, and great 
multinational corporations have a joint and close interest in a favorable 
climate of investment in the Third World, and their interconnections 









14 MANUFACTURING consent 


and relationships with the government in these policies are symbiotic. 3 * 
In sum, the dominant media firms are quite large businesses; they are 
controlled by very wealthy people or by managers who are subject to 
sharp constraints by owners and other market-profit-oriented forces; 40 
and they are closely interlocked, and have important common interests, 
with other major corporations, banks, and government* This is the first 
powerful filter that will affect news choices. 


1.2. THE ADVERTISING 
LICENSE TO DO BUSINESS: 

THE SECOND FILTER 

In arguing for the benefits of the free market as a means of controlling 
dissident opinion in the mid-nineteenth century, the Liberal chancellor 
of the British exchequer, Sir George Lewis, noted that the market 
would promote those papers “enjoying the preference of the advertising 
public.” 41 Advertising did, in fact, serve as a powerful mechanism 
weakening the working-class press. Curran and Seaton give the growth 
of advertising a status comparable with the increase in capital costs as 
a factor allowing the market to accomplish what state taxes and harass¬ 
ment failed to do, noting that these “advertisers thus acquired a de facto 
licensing authority since, without their support, newspapers ceased to 
be economically viable,” 42 

Before advertising became prominent, the price of a newspaper had 
to cover the costs of doing business. With the growth of advertising, 
papers that attracted ads could afford a copy price well below produc¬ 
tion costs. This put papers lacking in advertising at a serious disadvan¬ 
tage: their prices would tend to be higher, curtailing sales, and they 
would have less surplus to invest in improving the salability of the paper 
(features, attractive format, promotion, etc.). For this reason, an adver¬ 
tising-based system will tend to drive out of existence or into marginal- 
ity the media companies and types that depend on revenue from sales 
alone. With advertising, the free market does not yield a neutral system 
in which final buyer choice decides. The advertisers* choices influence 
media prosperity and survival. 43 The ad-based media receive an adver¬ 
tising subsidy that gives them a price-marketing-quality edge, which 
allows them to encroach on and further weaken their ad-free (or ad- 
disadvantaged) rivals. 44 Even if ad-based media cater to an affluent 
(“upscale”) audience, they easily pick up a large part of the “down- 



A PROPAGANDA MODEL 15 


scale” audience* and their rivals lose market share and are eventually 
driven out or marginalized* 

In fact* advertising has played a potent role in increasing concentra¬ 
tion even among rivals that focus with equal energy on seeking advertis¬ 
ing revenue. A market share and advertising edge on the part of one 
paper or television station will give it additional revenue to compete 
more effectively—promote more aggressively* buy more salable fea¬ 
tures and programs—and the disadvantaged rival must add expenses it 
cannot afford to try to stem the cumulative process of dwindling market 
