
photos, or taped radio programs to the media* The NCC Office of 
Information has an annual budget of some $350,000, issues about a 
hundred news releases per year, and holds four press conferences annu¬ 
ally, 71 The ratio of air force news releases and press conferences to 
those of the AFSC and NCC taken together are 150 to 1 (or 2,200 to 
1 if we count hometown news releases of the air force), and 94 to 1 
respectively. Aggregating the other services would increase the differ¬ 
ential by a large factor. 

Only the corporate sector has the resources to produce public infor¬ 
mation and propaganda on the scale of the Pentagon and other govern¬ 
ment bodies. The AFSC and NCC cannot duplicate the Mobil Oil 
company’s multimillion-dollar purchase of newspaper space and other 
corporate investments to get its viewpoint across. 72 The number of 
individual corporations with budgets for public information and lobby¬ 
ing in excess of those of the AFSC and NCC runs into the hundreds, 
perhaps even the thousands. A corporate collective like the U.S, Cham¬ 
ber of Commerce had a 1983 budget for research, communications, and 
political activities of $65 million. 73 By 1980, the chamber was publishing 
a business magazine {Nation’s Business) with a circulation of 1.3 million 
and a weekly newspaper with 740,000 subscribers, and it was producing 
a weekly panel show distributed to 400 radio stations, as well as its own 
weekly panel-discussion programs carried by 128 commercial television 
stations* 74 

Besides the U.S* Chamber, there are thousands of state and local 
chambers of commerce and trade associations also engaged in public- 
relations and lobbying activities* The corporate and trade-association 
lobbying network community is “a network of well over 150,000 profes¬ 
sionals,” 75 and its resources are related to corporate income, profits, 
and the protective value of public-relations and lobbying outlays. Cor¬ 
porate profits before taxes in 1985 were $295*5 billion. When the corpo¬ 
rate community gets agitated about the political environment, as it did in 
the 1970s, it obviously has the wherewithal to meet the perceived threat. 
Corporate and trade-association image and issues advertising increased 
from $305 million in 1975 to $650 million in 1980. 76 So did direct-mail 
campaigns through dividend and other mail stuffers, the distribution of 
educational films, booklets and pamphlets, and outlays on initiatives 
and refe rend urns, lobbying, and political and think-tank contributions* 
Aggregate corporate and trade-association political advertising and 
grass-roots outlays were estimated to have reached the billion-dollar-a- 
year level by 1978, and to have grown to $1,6 billion by 1984. 77 

To consolidate their preeminent position as sources, government and 



22 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


business-news promoters go to great pains to make things easy for news 
organizations. They provide the media organizations with facilities in 
which to gather; they give journalists advance copies of speeches and 
forthcoming reports; they schedule press conferences at hours well- 
geared to news deadlines; 78 they write press releases in usable language; 
and they carefully organize their press conferences and “photo oppor¬ 
tunity” sessions, 79 It is the job of news officers “to meet the journalist's 
scheduled needs with material that their beat agency has generated at 
its own pace, 1 * 80 

In effect* the large bureaucracies of the powerful subsidize the mass 
media, and gain special access by their contribution to reducing the 
media’s costs of acquiring the raw materials of, and producing, news. 
The large entities that provide this subsidy become “routine” news 
sources and have privileged access to the gates. Non-routine sources 
must struggle for access, and may be ignored by the arbitrary decision 
of the gatekeepers. It should also be noted that in the case of the 
largesse of the Pentagon and the State Department’s Office of Public 
Diplomacy, 81 the subsidy is at the taxpayers 5 expense, so that, in effect, 
the citizenry pays to be propagandized in the interest of power¬ 
ful groups such as military contractors and other sponsors of state 
terrorism. 

Because of their services, continuous contact on the beat, and mutual 
dependency, the powerful can use personal relationships, threats, and 
rewards to further influence and coerce the media- The media may feel 
obligated to carry extremely dubious stories and mute criticism in order 
not to offend their sources and disturb a close relationship, 83 It is very 
difficult to call authorities on whom one depends for daily news liars, 
even if they tell whoppers. Critical sources may be avoided not only 
because of their lesser availability and higher cost of establishing credi¬ 
bility, but also because the primary sources may be offended and may 
even threaten the media using them. 

Powerful sources may also use their prestige and importance to the 
media as a lever to deny critics access to the media: the Defense 
Department, for example, refused to participate in National Public 
Radio discussions of defense issues if experts from the Center for 
Defense Information were on the program; Elliott Abrams refused 
to appear on a program on human rights in Central America at 
the Kennedy School of Government, at Harvard University, unless 
the former ambassador, Robert White, was excluded as a partici¬ 
pant; 83 Claire Sterling refused to participate in television-network 
shows on the Bulgarian Connection where her critics would appear. 84 
In the last two of these cases, the authorities and brand-name ex- 




