propaganda campaign waged to get out the vote, outright fraud* and the 
constraints on and threats to journalists covering the election. 

Another issue off rhe government agenda is the purpose of the elec¬ 
tion. If its role is to influence the home population* spelling this out 
might arouse suspicions concerning its authenticity. In the case of the 
Vietnam election of 1967 and the El Salvador elections of 1982 and 1984* 
the purpose of the elections was not merely to placate the home public 
but also to mislead them on the ends sought. In both instances it was 
intimated that an election would contribute to a peaceable resolution 
to the conflict* whereas the intent was to clear the ground for intensified 
warfare. Nobody who proposed a peace option could appear as a seri¬ 
ous candidate in Vietnam in 1967* 7 and as we describe below* there was 
no peace candidate at all in El Salvador in either 1982 or 1984* although 
the polls and reporters kept saying that peace was the primary concern 
of the electorate. This highlights both the fraudulence of these elections 
and the urgency that the intentions of the sponsor be kept under wraps. 

In elections held in disfavored or enemy states* the U.S. government 
agenda is turned upside down. Elections are no longer equated with 
democracy, and U.S. officials no longer marvel at the election being 
held under adverse conditions. They do not commend the army for 
supporting the election and agreeing to abide by the results. On the 
contrary* the leverage the dominant party obtains by control of and 
support by the army is put forward in this case as compromising the 
integrity of the election. Rebel disruption is no longer proof that the 
opposition rejects democracy, and turnout is no longer the dramatic 
denouement of the struggle between a democratic army and its rebel 
opposition. Now the stress is on the hidden motives of the sponsors of 
the election, who are trying to legitimize themselves by this tricky 
device of a so-called election. 

Most important* the agenda of factors relevant to appraising an 
election is altered- From the stress on the superficial—long lines and 
smiling faces of voters* the simple mechanics of election-day balloting* 
and the personalities of the candidates—attention is now shifted to the 
basic parameters that were off the agenda in the sponsored election. As 
noted by Secretary of State Shultz* “The important thing is that if there 
is to be an electoral process, it be observed not only at the moment when 
people vote* but in all the preliminary aspects that make an election 
meaningful.” Spelling this out further* Shultz mentioned explicitly that 
for elections to be meaningful* “rival political groups” must be allowed 
“to form themselves and have access to people* ro have rhe right of 



legitimizing versus meaningless third world elections 91 


assembly, to have access to the media*” 8 These remarks were made 
apropos of the 1984 Nicaraguan election. No congresspersons or media 
commentators raised any question about whether these criteria should 
perhaps be applied to the Salvadoran or Guatemalan elections sched¬ 
uled during the same year* 

In brief, the government used a well-nigh perfect system of Orwel¬ 
lian doublethink: forgetting a criterion “that has become inconvenient, 
and then, when it becomes necessary again, * - * drawing] it back from 
oblivion for just so long as it is needed*”* It even acknowledges this fact: 
a senior U*S. official told members of the Latin American Studies 
Association (LASA) observing the Nicaraguan election: 

The United States is not obliged to apply the same standard of 
judgment to a country whose government is avowedly hostile to 
the U,S. as for a country like El Salvador, where it is not* These 
people [the Sandinistas] could bring about a situation in Central 
America which could pose a threat to U*S, security* That allows 
us to change our yardstick* 10 

But while a government may employ a blatant double standard, media 
which adhere to minimal standards of objectivity and are not them¬ 
selves part of a propaganda system would apply a single standard* Did 
the mass media of the United States follow a single standard in dealing 
with the elections in El Salvador, Guatemala, and Nicaragua, or did 
they follow their government’s agenda in order to put the Salvadoran 
and Guatemalan elections in a favorable light and to denigrate the one 
held in Nicaragua? 


3.2. BASIC ELECTORAL 
CONDITIONS IN EL SALVADOR, 
GUATEMALA, AND NICARAGUA, 

1 9 82-8 5 

All three of these countries, in which elections were held in the years 
1982-85, were in the midst of serious conflict: Nicaragua was being 
subjected to regular border incursions by the U.S.-organized and sup¬ 
plied contras. El Salvador was in the midst of a combination civil 
conflict and externally (U.S.) organized and funded counterinsurgency 
war* Guatemala, as we noted earlier, had evolved into a counterinsur- 


92 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


gency state* with permanent warfare to keep the majority of Indians and 
other peasants in their place* and violent repression was structured into 
the heart of the political system. 

