said, “Civil war,” 69 In no identifiable sector of American opinion would 
it have been possible even to ask the obvious question that would 
receive an easy and accurate answer in the case of the Soviet invasion 
of Afghanistan: “Why do you think the southern resistance is attacking 
U.S. military installations in South Vietnam?” In fact* even at the peak 
of peace-movement activities—or today, many years later, when it 
should be possible to observe the plain facts with some detachment—it 
would be quite impossible to raise this simple and obvious question, or 
to answer it, within the mainstream media and most of “the culture.” 

In this dismal record we see very clearly the consequences of mind¬ 
less media obedience in a state with enormous resources of violence. 


5.4. REPORTING ON THE WAR 

As the U.S. invasion mounted in scale and intensity, Indochina was 
flooded with war correspondents, many of whom reported what they 
saw and heard with honesty and courage. With rare exceptions, how¬ 
ever, they gave an account of the war as perceived by the U.S. military 
on the ground or as offered in press briefings. In the home offices, 
Washington's version prevailed until elite divisions within the United 
States expanded the range of tactical debate. 

Reporters often did not conceal atrocities committed by the U.S, 
military forces, although they did not appear to perceive them as atroci¬ 
ties and surely did not express the horror and outrage that would have 
been manifest if others were the perpetrators, and the United States or 
its clients the victims. 70 Malcolm Browne quotes a U.S. official who 
describes B-52 strikes in the South as “the most lucrative raids made 
at any time during the war”: 

Every single bomb crater is surrounded with bodies, wrecked 
equipment and dazed and bleeding people. At one such hole there 
were 40 or 50 men, all in green North Vietnamese uniforms but 
without their weapons, lying around in an obvious state of shock. 
We sent in helicopter gunships, which quickly put them out of 
their misery. 71 



194 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


The Geneva conventions require that “members of armed forces who 
have laid down their arms and those placed kors de combat by sickness, 
wounds, detention, or any other cause, shall in ail circumstances be 
treated humanely”; and there are no limits to the horror expressed, 
until today, over Communist treatment of U.S. pilots captured during 
the air operations that leveled much of North Vietnam. But the victims 
