on this topic, Kinzer is well aware of the facts. 84 The vast majority of 
Guatemalans are very poor, and they have been entirely excluded from 
political participation or representation since 1954. The insurgency 
grew out of the parlous condition and exploitation of that mass, and the 
absence of any possibility of a democratic process to alleviate injustice 
and misery* The ruling army had allowed only parties to run and 
civilians to hold office who agreed, tacitly or explicitly, to keep off the 
policy agenda all matters of central concern to the impoverished major¬ 
ity. There is no way to measure the strength of popular support for the 
insurgents, but in light of the fact that they espouse programs well 
oriented to the interests of the general population and have been able 
to maintain an insurgency without significant external aid, and that the 
army response has been a war against virtually the entire rural popula¬ 
tion, the rebel claim to be a “main opposition” would appear to be 
stronger than that of Arturo Cruz and his upper-class Nicaraguan 
associates* And if the rebels—or any candidates who would threaten the 
army and oligarchy in ways appealing to the majority—cannot qualify 
in a Guatemalan election, is it not essentially fraudulent? This was 
strongly suggested in both 1984 and 1985 by the Guatemalan Bishops’ 
Conference, but this respectable source, in contrast with Arturo Cruz 
and Robert Leiken, is blacked out. As with El Salvador, the election was 
not evaluated, either in advance or in retrospect, on the basis of whether 
or not the fundamental requirements of a free election were met For 
the U.S, government, the insurgents were not a main opposition, 
Guatemalan state terror was merely a public-relations inconvenience, 
and the elections were fair. The mass media’s treatment of the 
Guatemalan election reflected well this government propaganda 
agenda. 


3.6. NICARAGUA: MEDIA 
SERVICE IN THE 
DELEGITIMIZIN G PROCESS 

In contrast with the Salvadoran and Guatemalan cases, the Reagan 
administration was intent on discrediting the Nicaraguan election, 
which threatened to legitimize the Sandinista government and thus 


LEGITIMIZING VERSUS MEANINGLESS THIRD WORLD ELECTIONS II7 


weaken the case for U.S. funding of a terrorist army. The administra¬ 
tion had been berating the Sandinistas for failing to hold an election, 
but the actual holding of one was inconvenient. From the inception of 
Nicaraguan planning for the election, therefore, the administration 
began to express doubts about its quality. And just as it devoted itself 
to creating a positive image of the two client-state elections, so it 
expended substantial resources to depict the Nicaraguan election in the 
worst possible light. The media dutifully followed course, as a propa¬ 
ganda model predicts. 

The mass media failed to call attention to the cynicism of first 
assailing Nicaragua for failing to hold an election, and then striving to 
have the election either postponed or discredited. 85 Time even cites the 
absence of “official delegations [of observers] from the major western 
democracies” (Nov. 19, 1984), as if this were evidence of something 
discreditable in the election, rather than as a reflection of U.S. power. 
There were 450-odd foreign observers in attendance at the Nicaraguan 
election, some with superb credentials, observing more freely and at 
greater length than the official U.S. observers in El Salvador and 
Guatemala, Time and the rest of the mass media paid no attention to 
them, 86 

Stephen Kinzer’s use of observers is noteworthy. In the case of 
Nicaragua, he completely ignored the unofficial observers—many ex¬ 
ceedingly well qualified to observe, as we have noted—and he even 
ignored the official Dutch government team, drawn from the center- 
right and highly apologetic about atrocities in El Salvador, which 
observed both the Salvadoran and the Nicaraguan elections and con¬ 
cluded that the elections in Nicaragua “were more open than in El 
Salvador, in the sense that more people were able to take part; that the 
opposition did not fear for their lives”; and that “the legitimation of the 
regime is thus confirmed,” 87 In Guatemala, by contrast, he cited the 
official observer report in both the 1984 and 1985 elections, despite their 
great bias and superficiality (see the report discussed in appendix r). In 
the 1984 Guatemala election, Kinzer did refer to the report of the 
unofficial Human Rights Law Group that we cited earlier, quoting their 
statement that the voting process was “procedurally correct,” but neg¬ 
lecting to note here and elsewhere their numerous statements to the 
effect that “the greater part of the population lives in permanent fear” 
(p. 4), so that “procedural correctness” has little meaning. 

With no U.S.-government-designated official observers available in 
Nicaragua, the media relied even more heavily than usual on U.S. 
government handouts. It is enlightening to compare this conduited 
propaganda of the mass media with the findings of foreign-observer 



IlS manufacturing consent 


teams on the scene in Nicaragua. For the purpose of this comparison* 
which follows* we will use two such reports. One, that of the Irish 
Inter-Party Parliamentary Delegation* is The Elections in Nicaragua, 
November 1984. The delegation was composed of four individuals* three 
from right-wing or moderate-right political parties* who spent seven¬ 
teen days in Nicaragua at the time of the election. We will also use as 
a basis of comparison of media coverage the previously cited report of 
