would never be buried in favor of the entertainment preferred by adver¬ 
tisers, was never fulfilled . 26 The public is not sovereign over the media— 
the owners and managers, seeking ads, decide what is to be offered, and 
the public must choose among these. People watch and read in good part 
on the basis of what is readily available and intensively promoted. Polls 
regularly show that the public would like more news, documentaries, and 
other information, and less sex, violence, and other entertainment, even 
as they do listen to and watch the latter. There is little reason to believe 
that they would not like to understand why they are working harder with 
stagnant or declining incomes, have inadequate medical care at high 
costs, and what is being done in their name all over the world. If they are 
not getting much information on these topics, the propaganda model can 
explain why: the sovereigns who control the media choose not to offer 
such material. 


UPDATING THE CASE STUDIES 

In the case studies presented in chapters 2 through 6 , we examine the dif¬ 
ferences in treatment of situations broadly similar in character, except for 
the political and economic interests at stake. Our expectation is that news 
as well as editorial opinion will be strongly influenced by those interests 
and should display a predictable bias. We would anticipate, for example, 
that an election held by a client-state government favored by U.S. offi¬ 
cials would be treated differently by the media than an election held by a 
government that U.S. officials oppose. It will be seen in chapter 3 that in 
the important elections analyzed there this dichotomous treatment and 
bias was displayed to an extraordinary degree. 


Worthy and Unworthy Victims 

In chapter 2 , we compare the media's treatment of victims of enemy 
states and those of the United States and U.S. client states. Our predic¬ 
tion is that the victims of enemy states will be found “worthy” and will 
be subject to more intense and indignant coverage than those victimized 



XX INTRODUCTION 


by the United States or its diems, who are implicitly “unworthy / 1 It is 
shown in chapter 2 that a 1984 victim of the Polish Communists, the 
priest Jerzy Popieluszko, not only received far more coverage than Arch¬ 
bishop Oscar Romero, murdered in the U.S. client-state El Salvador in 
1980 ; he was given more coverage than the aggregate of one hundred reli¬ 
gious victims killed in U.S. client states, although eight of those victims 
were US. citizens. 

