
As we discussed in chapter i, the government is a primary flak 
producer as well as information source. This Guatemala episode is an 
important illustration of the government’s efforts to silence competing 
sources of information. It is interesting that the New York Times never 
mentioned or criticized this sinister campaign, even though it was 
carried out in the context of a policy protecting mass murderers. We 
will see in the next chapter that Time magazine cooperated with the 
campaign, citing Americas Watch only once on Guatemala, but with the 
qualifying explanation that it is “a controversial group that is often 
accused of being too sympathetic to the left 5 * (the State Department, 
on which Time relies very heavily, is never subject to any adjective 
suggesting any bias). The Washington Post (Dec. 4, 1982) had one 
back-page article by Terri Shaw, on the Enders letter, which features 
the State Department charges in the title—“Embassy Sees ‘Disinfor¬ 
mation’ on Guatemala: U.S, Report Says Rights Groups are Used”— 
and in the text. The author allows the embassy claim that “the report 
never was meant to be made public” to stand unchallenged, and never 
refers to the threat posed to human-rights monitors by the release of 
such State Department charges. The human-rights groups are allowed 
to suggest a State Department intent to discredit, but the word “disin¬ 
formation” is never applied to State Department allegations, and no 
serious examination of the content of those charges is provided. This 
superficial piece exhausts the sample media’s coverage of this State 
Department campaign. The AW report Human Rights in Guatemala: No 
Neutrab Allowed, which discusses this campaign and the Enders letter, 
was never mentioned. 


2*6* THE MUTUAL SUPPORT 
GROUP MURDERS IN 
GUATEMALA 

Human-rights monitoring and protective agencies have had a very 
difficult time organizing and surviving in the “death-squad democ¬ 
racies” of El Salvador and Guatemala. Between October 1980 and 
March 1983, five officials of the Human Rights Commission of El Salva¬ 
dor were seized and murdered by the security forces. In accord with 



80 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


a propaganda models these murders should have been of little interest 
to the U.S. mass media, and this expectation is borne out by evidence. 
As an illustrative comparison, the New York Times had a grand total of 
four back-page articles on these five murders, 96 whereas, during the 
same period, the Times had thirty-five articles on the Soviet human- 
rights activist Natan Sharansky, not all of them on the back pages. The 
proportionality of attention fits well our general propaganda-model 
analysis of the media’s treatment of worthy and unworthy victims. 

Guatemala has been even more inhospitable to human-rights organi¬ 
zations than El Salvador, Guatemalan Archbishop Monsignor Prospero 
Penados del Barrio asserted in 1984 that “It is impossible for a human 
rights office to exist in Guatemala at the present time.” 97 “Disappear¬ 
ances” as an institutional form began in Guatemala in the mid-1960s 
and eventually reached levels unique in the Western Hemisphere, with 
the total estimated to be some 40,ooo. 9S Protest groups that have 
formed to seek information and legal redress have been consistently 
driven out of business by state-organized murder. The Association of 
University Students (AEU) sought information on the disappeared 
through the courts in the course of a brief opening in 1966, but after 
one sensational expose of the police murder of twenty-eight leftists, the 
system closed down again. As McClintock points out, “In the next few 
years many AEU leaders and member law students were hunted down 
and killed.” 99 In the 1970s, a Committee of the Relatives of the Disap¬ 
peared was organized by the AEU, with headquarters in San Carlos 
National University. As Americas Watch points out, “It disbanded after 
plainsclothesmen walked into the University's legal aid center on 
March 10, 1974, and shot and killed i:z principal organizer, lawyer 
Edmundo Guerra Theilheimer, the center's director.” 100 Another 
human-rights group, the National Commission for Human Rights, was 
created in the late 1970s by psychologist and journalist Irma Flaquer. 
Her son was murdered, and she herself “disappeared” on October 16, 
1980. 

According to the British Parliamentary Human Rights Group, in 
1984 alone there were an average of one hundred political murders and 
over forty disappearances per month in Guatemala. 101 These figures are 
almost surely an underestimate, as only the disappearances that took 
place in and around Guatemala City received any publicity. The greater 
number of murders and disappearances occur among rural and Indian 
families who do not have the resources to complain and are more 
exposed to retaliation. 

In this context of murder, fear, and the prior failure of all human- 
rights organizations, the Mutual Support Group, or GAM, was formed 


WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS 8l 


in June 1984. It was a product of the desperation felt by people seeking 
information on the whereabouts of disappeared relatives and willing to 
take serious risks to that end. Many of them had suffered enormous 
pain in frustrating searches and inquiries that never bore fruit* There 
is no legal redress in Guatemala, and nothing useful can be obtained 
by appeals to the police or courts of law. Mr. Hicho, looking for his 
