was laid waste, including B-52 bombing targeted “on the most heavily 
populated areas of Cambodia,” where U.S. Air Force maps showed 
“thousands of square miles of densely populated, fertile areas . _ _ 



274 manufacturing consent 


marked black from the Inundation”—“the careless policies of the White 
House” criticized by William Shawcross. 59 At just this time* Khmer 
Rouge programs became extremely harsh, so available studies indicate* 
including a refugee study by Kenneth Quinn* of the National Security 
Council staff* who never considers a possible causal connection, how¬ 
ever* between the harshenmg of policy and the sharp increase in the 
program of saturation bombing. Timothy Carney* the second of the 
three major U.S. government specialists on Cambodia (Quinn* Carney* 
Charles Twining)* also notes that “sometime in 1973 the party appar¬ 
ently decided to accelerate its program to alter Khmer society*” for no 
suggested reason. 60 


6.2.5. Phase I in the media 

During this period* there was extensive media coverage of Cambodia, 
and there was no dearth of evidence on what was taking place in the 
regions subjected to U.S. Air Force atrocities. It was not necessary to 
undertake a difficult expedition to the Thai-Cambodia border to find 
refugees who would tell what they knew* but the victims of phase I of 
“the decade of the genocide” who were huddled in the slums of Phnom 
Penh or other towns and villages to which they fled were of no more 
interest than those in the miserable camps on the outskirts of Vien¬ 
tiane—unless they had tales of terror by the Cambodian insurgents to 
recount (the Vietnamese long having faded into the background). 61 No 
books or articles were written by Father Ponchaud* who lived among 
the peasants and sympathized deeply with their plight* so he informed 
us when the time came to expose atrocities of the Khmer Rouge. The 
same was true of many others who were later to expres^ their heartfelt 
concerns for Cambodians suffering under Khmer Rouge terror* but 
who did not seek to investigate and publicize the plight of the rural 
population during phase I of the genocide* when such efforts might 
have had a crucial impact on the policies that were destroying Cam¬ 
bodia, a fact that might merit some thought. 

The standard U.S. media picture of phase I is something like this, 
“Until the turning point in 1973,... on the surface* Cambodians smiled 
and were full of pleasantries,” 62 but afterwards the mood of “Cambodi¬ 
ans” became one of “apathy” and “resignation” because “impoverished 
farmers* refugees and soldiers” (most of whom were press-ganged into 
service from among the poor and refugee communities) felt that their 
“leaders seem powerless to defend them against human and natural 
adversities.” 63 There is a “spirit of doom” as the government is “teeter- 





THE INDOCHINA WARS (ll): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 275 


ing on the wreckage of the democratic republic it set out to create* 1 with 
the coup that overthrew Sihanouk. 64 The Americans try, but with little 
success, to “give the Cambodians some sense of confidence in their 
leadership, 55 but, nevertheless, “Cambodian morale has been sliding 
steadily for a long time/ 5 However, “Rather than any sense of urgency 
here [in Phnom Penh], there is the grand fatalism that is so much a part 
of Cambodia's Hindu-influenced Buddhism,” 65 although it somehow 
does not seem to affect “the enemy, 55 whose “determination” in the face 
of the awesome firepower unleashed against them “baffles” the Ameri¬ 
cans, But there is still “a feeling that the Americans will save the 
Cambodians at the last minute because they cannot save themselves* 55 
“Almost every conversation with a Cambodian now is the same,” 
namely, fear that the “demoralized army will collapse” when the 
American bombing terminates on August 15. The impending bombing 
cutoff is “painful 55 to the “Cambodians” because of “the recent steady 
successes of enemy troops 55 against overwhelming odds. In his final 
summary report from Phnom Penh as the U.S* bombing ended, Sydney 
Schanberg raised “the key unanswered question: How have the insur¬ 
gents—without any planes of their own, and without the extensive 
artillery support the Government troops have, with only small arms and 
mobile weapons * . *—been able not just to match the Government 
forces, which are more than twice their size, but to push the Govern¬ 
ment forces back and sustain the offensive for six months without any 
significant lull? 55 “Since the insurgents are not superhuman, there must 
be other explanations for their success. 55 Perhaps they are so “deter¬ 
mined and capable 55 because they “are less fatalistic than the Khmers 
on this side 55 and “believe they can change their environment 55 (U-S. 
embassy official). In this regard, “the enemy 55 are quite different from 
“the Cambodian villager, 55 who “usually has no politics 55 and “is not 
interested in taking sides, only to be left alone to farm and fish and feed 
his family and once in a while to celebrate on a Buddhist holiday. 5566 

The civil war, then, pits “the Cambodians” against “the enemy, 55 
Cambodian peasants who were surely not full of pleasantries during the 
pre-1973 U.S. bombings. “The Cambodians, 55 fatalistic and resigned, 
either want to be left alone (“the Cambodian villager 55 ) or hope that the 
United States will save them and their government, striving for democ¬ 
racy (“the Cambodians 55 generally)* The enemy struggle on successfully 
against overwhelming odds, baffling the Americans—exactly as Ameri¬ 
cans building “democracy 55 have been baffled by the same problem in 
