phasized the fact that voting was not required by law* and that* contrary 
to the U.S. government propaganda expounded by Time and other 
media entities* the coercive elements in getting out the vote were small. 
Human-rights abuses by the government that contribute to an environ¬ 
ment of fear* LASA pointed out* were “on a very small scale" when 
“compared to other nations in the region ..(p. 28). In fact* they note 
that fear in Nicaragua is directed more to the United States and the 
contras than to the government in Managua. 


3*6*5. The “main opposition” to the 

fore 

As we saw* in El Salvador and Guatemala* the fact that the insurgents 
were off the ballot did not faze the U.S. media one bit. Neither did 
Duarte's acknowledgment in 1981 that “the masses were with the guer¬ 
rillas” when he joined the junta a year earlier (which would clearly 
make them a “main opposition”). 99 Nor were the media affected by the 
army's murder of the opposition leadership in both El Salvador and 
Guatemala. In El Salvador, the exclusion of the rebels was part of the 
U.S. government's electoral plan; they were* therefore* not a “main 
opposition*” and the debarment and even murder of their leaders did 
not compromise election quality. In the Nicaraguan case* in sharp 
contrast* the U.S. government worked with a different frame—the 
exclusion of its sponsored rebels and any other candidates was a serious 
matter that threatened the quality of the election. The media followed 
like good little doggies (lap* rather than watch-). 

The central dramatic propaganda line for the Nicaraguan election 
pressed by U.S. officials was the alleged struggle of Arturo Cruz to 
induce the Sandinistas to create an open system in which he would be 
able to compete fairly, the failure of the “Marxists-Leninists” to make 
adequate concessions, Cruz's refusal to compete, and the subsequent 
“exclusion” of the “main opposition.” Cruz, however* was a “main 
opposition' 5 only in the propaganda construct of the U.S. government 
and mass media. A longtime expatriate (who now concedes that he was 



126 manufacturing consent 


on the CIA payroll), with no mass base in Nicaragua, Cruz would 
almost certainly have done poorly in a free election. 100 There is good 
reason to believe that Cruz never intended to run, but that he and his 
sponsors had held out this possibility precisely to allow the propaganda 
frame to be used effectively. 101 

The mass media focused on the Cruz drama heavily and uncritically. 
