6, under “The Pol Pot Era” (pp. 284-85). 

130. Thus when the CIA directs Nicaraguan contras to attack such “soft 
targets” as farming cooperatives, with explicit State Department approval, the 
media commentators, including doves, either applaud or offer philosophical 
disquisitions on whether such targets are legitimate, given that they are de¬ 
fended by lightly armed militia. Terrorist attacks on Israeli kibbutzim, also 
defended by armed settlers, are regarded somewhat differently. For details, see 
Noam Chomsky, The Culture of Terrorism (Boston: South End Press, 1988). 

131. The variable use of agendas and frameworks can be seen with great clarity 
in the treatment of Third World elections supported and opposed by the 
United States, as described in chapter 3. 

132. Classic in their audacity are Michael Ledeen’s assertions that: (1) Qad- 
dafi’s word is given more credence in the mass media than that of the U.S. 
government; and (2) “Relatively minor human rights transgressions in a 
friendly country (especially if ruled by an authoritarian government of the 
Right) are given far more attention and more intense criticism than far graver 
sins of countries hostile to us . . .” ( Grave New World [New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1985], p. 131; Qaddafi’s superior credence is described on pp. 
132—33). See chapter 2 of this book for documentation on the reality of mass- 
media treatment of abuses by clients and enemy states. 



Chapter 2: Worthy and Unworthy 
Victims 

1. In a speech of July 19,1986, Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega, in answer¬ 
ing charges of religious persecution, asserted that of 138 religious persons 
murdered and 278 kidnapped or disappeared in Central America since 1979 (a 
figure that includes Lay Delegates of the Word), none had been victimized by 
the Nicaraguan government. ( Central America News Update , Aug. 4, 1986). 
Many had been killed by the contras, however, in an ongoing tradition of 
Somocista violence. See Andrew Reding, “The Church in Nicaragua,” 
Monthly Review (July-August 1987), pp. 34-36. The large majority were mur¬ 
dered by the army and security forces of U.S. client states, or the death squads 
affiliated with them. 

2. In The Real Terror Network (Boston: South End Press, 1982), Edward Her¬ 
man shows that in the years 1976-81, the only massive coverage of the victimi¬ 
zation of individuals abroad by the New York Times was of Soviet dissidents, 
most notably Sharansky and Sakharov (pp. 196-99), although there were nu¬ 
merous cases of comparable or far worse treatment within U.S. domains. 

3. Computed by dividing the number of articles and CBS News reports (or 
column inches) devoted to Popieluszko by the number dealing with the one 
hundred religious victims and multiplying by 100. 

4. Anthony Lewis says that the Soviet dissidents “are enough like us so that 
we identify with them” (“A Craving for Rights,” New York Times, Jan. 31, 
I 977 )* a partially valid point, as the vast majority of victims of U.S. foreign 
policy are Third World peasants, but invalid in that victims in U.S. client states 
as much “like us” as Soviet dissidents do not get comparable attention, as 
shown in the cases mentioned and the reference in note 2. 

5. It is not coincidental that the U.S. secretary of state, Alexander Haig, and 
the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, Jeane Kirkpatrick, actually de¬ 
fended the assassinations of the American women, as described below. 

6. Apart from the details by the New York Times shown in table 2-2, there were 
at least four other Times articles that repeated such information, and similar 
detail was given in Time and Newsweek and on CBS News. To give a sample 
of one of many in Time, an article entitled “Grim Tale: Details of a Martyr’s 
Death” (Nov. 19, 1984), reads as follows: “Church officials who viewed 
the martyred priest’s body reported that he had been savagely beaten. A rope 
had been tied around his neck, wrists and ankles so that he would strangle 
himself if he struggled to get free. Three fingers of Popieluszko’s left hand 
were sliced through to the bone, and there were deep gouges on his arms. 
His lungs contained enough water to indicate that he was still breathing, 
even if unconscious, when he was tossed, bound hand and foot, into 
a reservoir.” Time repeats these details and others with obvious relish at 
every opportunity. As we will see, Time is less lavish in details on unworthy 
victims. 

7. Time’s account entitled “Memories of Father Jerzy” (Nov. 12,1984) has no 
counterpart in the articles on the deaths of the unworthy victims discussed 
below. 

8. “A Polish General is Tied to Death of Warsaw Priest,” November 3,1984; 
“Pole in Killing Tells of Hints of Top-Level Backup,” January 9,1985; “Pole 



on Trial Names 2 Generals,” January 5, 1985; “Second Abductor of Polish 
Priest Says Order Came ‘From the Top,’ ” January 3, 1985. 

9. See chapter 4, below. 

10. On May 6, 1986, Laura Pinto, a member of the Salvadoran “Mothers of 
the Disappeared,” was picked up by three armed men, beaten, raped, and left 
on the street. On May 29 she was again abducted and tortured, and shortly 
thereafter twelve members of her group were detained by the police. The 
British New Statesman expressed surprise that this kind of terror could take 
place, given the fact that Laura Pinto had previously traveled to Europe and 
made Western Europeans aware of her existence (Jane Dibblin, “El Salvador’s 
Death Squads Defy European Opinion,” June 13, 1986). Western Europeans 
did, in fact, protest these abuses. What made this terror feasible, however, was 
the fact that the power directly involved in El Salvador, the United States, has 
