1966, that “Washington cannot shape the political future in Saigon, but 
it can continue to urge a search for unity among all the South Viet¬ 
namese political factions pending the September elections. 55 In fact, the 
rulers at the moment had been imposed by the United States, the 
election was a U.S. idea, and—needless to say—the South Vietnamese 
who constituted the only “truly mass-based political party in South 
Vietnam 15 (Pike, referring to the NLF) were not considered one of the 
“South Vietnamese political factions.” As for the “unity 55 sought by the 
United States, it was intended solely to provide a base for prosecution 
of the U.S. war. As that goal could be accomplished only by suppression 
of all popular movements, later in 1966 the military junta, with U.S. 
approval and direct assistance, crushed by force the largest non-Com- 
munist group, the organized Buddhists, thereby clearing the ground for 
durable rule by Thieu and Ky. Despite all of this, the U.S. media did 
not point out that any basis for a free election had been destroyed, and 
that the unelected government was maintained in power solely because 
its aims were identical to those of the U.S. administration—that is, that 
it was a classic example of a puppet government. 38 On the contrary, the 
junta never ceased to be the leaders of free and independent South 
Vietnam, the word “puppet” being reserved for agents of enemy states. 

Returning to the expanding U.S. war, efforts to obtain congressional 
support succeeded with the August 7,1964 resolution, after the Tonkin 
Gulf incident, authorizing the president “to take all necessary measures 
to repel any armed attack against the forces of the United States and 
to prevent further aggression” by the Vietnamese in Vietnam, “a virtual 
blank check in waging the war for the Administration/* 3 * 

The United States invaded outright in early 1965, also initiating the 
regular bombing of North Vietnam in the hope that Hanoi would use 
its influence to call off the southern resistance, and to justify the escala¬ 
tion of the attack against the South, which required something beyond 




THE INDOCHINA WARS (i): VIETNAM 183 


the “internal aggression” by the NLF within South Vietnam that UN 
Ambassador Adlai Stevenson identified as the problem we faced. 40 By 
the time of the U.S. land invasion in 1965* over 150,000 people had been 
killed in South Vietnam, according to figures cited by Bernard Fall, 
most of them “under the crushing weight of American armor, napalm, 
jet bombers and finally vomiting gases,” or victims of the state terrorism 
of the U.S.-installed regimes* 41 From January 1965, the United States 
also employed Korean mercenaries, some 300,000 in all, who carried 
out brutal atrocities in the South. The first regular North Vietnamese 
unit, a four-hundred-man battalion, was thought to have been detected 
in border areas of the south in late April 1965; until the Tet offensive 
in January 1968, according to Pentagon sources, North Vietnamese 
units, mainly drawing U-S. forces away from populated centers, were 
at about the level of Korean and Thai mercenaries who were terrorizing 
South Vietnam, all vastly outnumbered by the U*S* forces. 

By 1967, the war had reached such a level of devastation that, in 
FalPs words, “Vietnam as a cultural and historic entity .. * is threatened 
with extinction . *. [as]. *. the countryside literally dies under the blows 
of the largest military machine ever unleashed on an area of this size.” 42 
The strategy of destroying South Vietnam was generally considered a 
success. Harvard professor and government adviser Samuel Hunting- 
ton concluded that “In an absent-minded way the United States in 
Vietnam may well have stumbled upon the answer to "wars of national 
liberation, 1 ” namely, “forced-draft urbanization and mobilization” by 
violence so extreme as “to produce a massive migration from country¬ 
side to city,” thus “undercutting” the Maoist strategy of organizing the 
peasant population (over 80 percent of the population when these 
techniques were initiated) and undermining the Viet Cong, “a powerful 
force which cannot be dislodged from its constituency so long as the 
constituency continues to exist*” 43 

The Tet offensive of January 1968, conducted almost entirely by 
South Vietnamese NLF forces in cities and towns throughout the 
country, convinced U.S- elites that the war was proving too costly to 
the United States, and that strategy should shift toward a more “capi¬ 
tal-intensive” operation with reliance on an indigenous mercenary 
army (in the technical sense of the phrase) and gradual withdrawal of 
the U.S* forces, which were by then suffering a severe loss of morale, 
a matter of growing concern to military authorities. U*S, forces under¬ 
took a post-Tet “accelerated pacification campaign,” in actuality a 
mass-murder operation that demolished the NLF and much of what 
was left of the peasant society while killing tens of thousands and 
extending the destruction of the country. Much of North Vietnam, 



184 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


particularly the southern region* was turned into a moonscape* and 
Laos was battered under the heaviest bombing in history* including the 
peasant society of northern Laos where, the U.S, government 
conceded* the bombing had no relation to its war in South Vietnam. 
The United States bombed and invaded Cambodia* destroying much of 
the countryside and mobilizing embittered peasants to the cause of the 
Khmer Rouge* previously a marginal force. By the war's end* the death 
toll in Indochina may have reached four million or more* 44 and the land 
and societies were utterly devastated. Subsequent U.S. policy has 
sought to prevent any recovery from this cataclysm by refusing repara¬ 
tions, aid, and trade* and blocking assistance from other sources— 
