for 180 days. Under these rulings* in the thirty months before the March 
198a election* and prior to the 1984 elections* many thousands of civil¬ 
ians were seized* imprisoned* tortured* raped* and murdered outside of 
legal processes for alleged “subversive” actions and thoughts. The state 
of siege was lifted in early 1982 solely for the six parties contesting the 
election* and it was lifted entirely ten days before the election for all 
Salvadorans—although* unfortunately* the citizenry was not informed 
of this fact until after the election was over and state-of-siege condi¬ 
tions were reimposed. 15 The practice of exposing mutilated bodies for 
the edification of the citizenry became institutionalized in the early 
1980s in El Salvador. We described in chapter 2 the difficulty the U.S. 
government had in getting underlings jailed* tried* and convicted for 
the murder of four American citizens* even under intense U.S. pressure. 
The people of El Salvador had no protection whatsoever from the state 
terrorists* apart from that afforded by the guerrilla army in the regions 
under their control. The threat of extreme violence by the state against 
dissident speech was acute in El Salvador in 1982 and 1984, and was 
incompatible with a free election. 

In Guatemala, similarly* during 1984 and 1985* and for many years 
before* the actions of the armed forces against alleged subversives was 
entirely outside the rule of law. Thousands were seized* tortured* and 
killed without warrant and without any individual right to hearing or 
trial. As in El Salvador* mutilation and exposure of the tortured bodies 
became commonplace in the late 1970s and the 1980s. 16 The courts were 
dominated by the military* as the latter would simply not execute or 
obey a court order of which they disapproved, and the judges were not 
inclined to challenge the military for reasons of dependency or fear. 
Even Viscount Colville of Culross* the special rapporteur of the UN 
General Assembly who has been a notorious apologist for the Guatema¬ 
lan regime, after pointing out that over eighty members of the judiciary, 
court staff, and legal profession had been murdered in the early 1980s 
and that many others were threatened, says that “Such events make 
their mark and cannot quickly be mitigated.” 17 Two illustrations of the 
lack of court autonomy may be noted here: in May 1983* Ricardo 
Sagastume Vidaure* then president of the supreme court* was simply 
removed by military order for attempting to bring military personnel 
under the jurisdiction of the legal system. 18 On July 19, 1984* Colonel 
Djalmi Dominguez* head of public relations for the army, told the 
newspaper Prensa Libre that the army wouldn’t tolerate its members 
being taken to court on any charges. 19 



LEGITIMIZING VERSUS MEANINGLESS THIRD WORLD ELECTIONS 95 


In the early 1980s, following the mass killings and village destruction 
of 1980-83, vast numbers of peasants were resettled in “model villages” 
and other places under army control, and over 800,000 males were 
made obligatory members of civil patrols with military functions under 
close army surveillance. According to the British parliamentary group 
that visited Guatemala in 1984, “The civilian patrol system is imple¬ 
mented by terror, and designed also to sow terror, . , . People who do 
anything out of the ordinary come under immediate suspicion and are 
taken by the patrols to the army's destacamiento . Interrogation will be 
done by the army, but the killing of murdered suspects [is] often by the 
civilian patrols.” 20 Bishops Taylor and O’Brien, representing the 
Roman Catholic Bishops' Conferences of Scotland and England-Wales 
respectively, reported after their visit to Guatemala in 1984 that 

The civilian population is under almost total control by a heavy 
army and police presence throughout the country, which we were 
able to observe. There is also a nationwide network of civil defense 
patrols, military commissioners and informers, and “model vil¬ 
lages” serving in some cases as internment camps for the Indian 
population from the areas of conflict. Much of Guatemala resem¬ 
bles a country under military occupation. One of our informants 
summed up the situation by saying that the military had estab¬ 
lished a system of “structural control.” 21 

The InterAmerican Commission on Human Rights, following an on¬ 
site visit in May 1985, also found that freedom of speech and assembly 
did not exist in Guatemala: 

The right of assembly and freedom of association, considered in 
Articles 15 and 16 of the American Convention, are also restricted 
and curtailed, because existing security measures in the Develop¬ 
ment Poles and the strict supervision of the Civil Defense Patrols 
inhibit residents from taking part in any social, ideological, cultu¬ 
ral or other assemblies or associations. All such meetings, when 
they do occur, are subject to surveillance, supervision and control 
by the authorities, so they do nor enjoy the freedom implied by 
such rights. 22 

Public demonstrations were permissible in Guatemala during the 
1984-85 elections, with three days’ advance notice and approval of the 
military authorities. In the Guatemalan context, however, this grant of 
rights was not meaningful. The delegation of the International Human 



96 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


Rights Law Group and the Washington Office on Latin America noted 
that whatever the election guarantees, 

the military and civil defense patrols and the climate of fear also 
made it difficult for many Guatemalans to organize and assemble. 
