peared to mean throwing the internal political situation open and thus 
inviting Communist participation” in a democratic process, here—as 
always—intolerable to the United States unless the right outcome is 
first determined by establishing a proper distribution of force, 62 Ambas¬ 
sador Taylor feared as the worst outcome a government that would 
“continue to seek a broadened consensus” and would thus “become 
susceptible to an accommodation with the liberation front*” After the 
war ended, senior Pentagon legal adviser Paul Wamke observed criti¬ 
cally in retrospect that “For the United States to ‘compromise’ and 
permit the indigenous forces of Vietnam to work their own way would 
be to condone the demise of the anti-Communist regime we had sup¬ 
ported in Saigon for twenty years.” 

UN Secretary-General U Thant initiated a negotiation effort in the 
fall of 1964, with the support of Moscow and Hanoi and in accord with 
the consensus of Vietnamese as well as others, but it was rebuffed by 
Washington* As for the media, “It was not until after the die had been 
cast—not until March 9,1965, after the United States had mounted its 
sustained air war against the North and landed the first U.S. ground 
forces in Vietnam—that The New York Times reported U Thant’s 1964 
efforts,” 63 

The U.S* position throughout was that “after, but only after 3 we have 
established a clear pattern of pressure,” could peaceful means be con¬ 
sidered (William Bundy, Aug, II, 1964; his emphasis). First violence, 
then—perhaps—recourse to the peaceful means required by interna¬ 
tional law and the supreme law of the land. The elections provision of 
the Geneva Accords had been officially described in a 1961 State De¬ 
partment white paper as “a well-laid trap” that the United States had 
skillfully evaded, and planners were in no mood to fall into such a 
“trap” in 1964, until the use of violence had secured their objectives. 64 
Increasingly, U.S. planners turned to the policy of expanding the war 
to the North in the hope that this would compensate for their political 
weakness. 

No such conception of the evolving events, and their meaning, was 
ever made accessible through the mainstream media, which kept to the 





THE INDOCHlNA WARS (i): VIETNAM 191 


official line that the United States was pursuing limited measures "to 
strengthen South Vietnam against attack by the Communists,” support¬ 
ing South Vietnam "against Communist aggression.” 65 

In the New York Times version, the United States was leading "the 
free world's fight to contain aggressive Communism” (Robert Trum¬ 
bull), defending South Vietnam "against the proxy armies of Soviet 
Russia—North and South Vietnamese guerrillas” (Hanson Baldwin), 
just as the French had fought “a seven-and-a-half-year struggle” 
against “foreign-inspired and supplied Communists” In early 1965, 
President Johnson decided "to step up resistance to Vietcong infiltra¬ 
tion in South Vietnam” (Tom Wicker); the Vietcong "infiltrate” in their 
own country , while we “resist” this aggression. Since the South Viet¬ 
namese guerrillas were "trying to subvert this country” (David Halber- 
stam), it was natural that the Times supported the strategic-hamlet 
program as necessary despite the coercion and brutality; it was “con¬ 
ducted as humanely as possible” to offer the peasants "better protection 
against the Communists” (Halberstam, Homer Bigart), The peasant 
support for the South Vietnamese "aggressors” and the reasons for it 
were ignored. H allin comments that in the entire New York Times 
coverage from 1961 through September 1963, he found two "extremely 
brief references to land tenure. 66 

While the print media did on occasion reflect the perceptions and 
opinions of American military officers in the field, arousing much irate 
condemnation thereby for their anti-Americanism and "negative re¬ 
porting,” television was more obedient. Thus “the head of the Penta¬ 
gon’s public-affairs office was able to assure Kennedy that the [NBC] 
network had been persuaded that it would be 'against the interest of the 
United States' to show its coverage of ‘rough treatment by South 
Vietnamese soldiers to Viet-Cong prisoners, with a U,S. Army captain 
appearing in this sequence/ NBC J s news director undertook to with¬ 
hold this film's scheduled appearance on the Huntley-Brinkley show, 
and to keep it on the shelf so far as any other programs were con- 
cemed/ ,6T 

Until the expansion of the war in 1965 began to provoke some con¬ 
cern, the NLF and DRV were "treated almost exclusively as an arm 
of international Communism,” Hallin found in his analysis of the 
Times's coverage. "The term civil war began to be used in 1965” and 
"the term aggression began to appear sometimes in quotation marks”— 
referring, of course, to Vietnamese aggression in Vietnam, the concept 
of American aggression being unimaginable, then or since. But concern 
over Vietnamese "aggression” never abated, as when James Reston 
discussed “the main point”: “How, then, is this aggression by subver- 



192 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


$ion to be stopped?”—referring to aggression by Vietnamese against the 
American invaders and their clients. Similarly* on television, even more 
conformist than the print media, Peter Jennings* showing Pentagon 
films on U.S. air attacks* commented that “This is the shape of things 
