over which floated a banner saying: “We thank you for liberating us 
from Communist terror,” The Times reported that the refugees had 
lived “in caves and bunkers for many months” because “heavy Ameri¬ 
can bombing and artillery and naval shelling” had destroyed their 
homes, as well as a dike that was “blasted by American jets to deprive 
the North Vietnamese [sic] of a food supply.” It was left unrepaired, 
so that two years later “the salt water of the South China Sea continues 
to submerge the fields where rice once grew.” The reason, according 
to an American official, is that the people “were written off as commu¬ 
nists,” and for the same reason the region was left in ruins: “the hills 
that overlook the flooded paddies, once scattered with huts, are . . . 
filled with bomb fragments, mines and unexploded artillery shells,” and 
“B-52 craters nearly 20 feet deep pock the hills.” 76 

Bombing of dikes in the North, occasionally reported, 77 was contro¬ 
versial, as was the bombing of North Vietnam generally. The reason is 
that the cost to the United States might be high because of a potential 
Chinese or Soviet response, regarded as a serious and dangerous possi¬ 
bility, or because of the impact on international opinion. 78 But these 
questions did not arise in the case of U*S, terror against the South 
Vietnamese, which therefore proceeded without notable concern or, it 
seems, much in the way of planning. In the Pentagon Papers, we find 
extensive discussion and debate over the escalation of the bombing 
against the North, while there is virtually nothing about the far more 
destructive bombing, defoliation, destruction of vast areas by Rome 
plows, etc., in South Vietnam, where we were “saving” the population 
from “aggression.” With regard to South Vietnam, the planning record 
is limited to the question of deployment of U.S. troops, which again 
raised potential costs to the United States. 7 ® 

The most notable exception to the easy tolerance of atrocities perpe¬ 
trated against South Vietnamese was the My Lai massacre, in March 
1968, reported at once by the NLF among other massacres that are still 
not acknowledged or discussed. Details were disclosed in Paris in June 
1968, but neglected by the media until November 1969 despite extensive 
efforts by helicopter gunner Ronald Ridenhour to publicize the story, 
which finally broke through to the general public, thanks to the persist¬ 
ence of Seymour Hersh, at the time of a massive demonstration in 
Washington, when media attention was focused on antiwar protest. The 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (l): VIETNAM I$7 


massacre was a footnote to the post-Tet accelerated pacification cam¬ 
paign, and minor in context. More revealing was the massacre at nearby 
My Khe, with ninety civilians reported dead, discovered by the Peers 
Panel inquiry into the My Lai massacre; proceedings against the officer 
in charge were dismissed on the grounds that this was merely a normal 
operation in which a village was destroyed and its population murdered 
or forcibly relocated, a decision that tells us all we need to know about 
the American war in South Vietnam, but that passed without com¬ 
ment, 80 

While the nation agonized about the sentencing of Lieutenant Wil¬ 
liam Galley for his part in the My Lai massacre, a new ground sweep 
in the same area drove some 16,000 peasants from their homes, and a 
year later the camp where the My Lai remnants were relocated in this 
operation was largely destroyed by air and artillery bombardment, the 
destruction attributed to the Viet Cong. 81 These events too passed with 
little notice, and no calls for an inquiry—reasonably enough, since 
these too were normal and routine operations. 

Medical workers at the nearby Canadian-run hospital reported that 
they knew of the My Lai massacre at once but gave it little attention 
because it was not out of the ordinary in a province (Quang Ngai) that 
had been virtually destroyed by ILS. military operations. The highest- 
ranking officer to have faced court-martial charges for the massacre, 
Colonel Oran Henderson, stated that “every unit of brigade size has its 
Mylai hidden some place, 51 although “every unit doesn't have a Riden- 
hour” to expose what had happened, 82 Knowledgeable elements of the 
peace movement also gave the My Lai massacre no special notice, for 
the same reasons. 

The reasons why this particular massacre became a cause c£l£bre 
were explained by Newsweek'^ Saigon bureau chief Kevin Buckley, 
referring to Operation Wheeler Wallawa, with 10,000 enemy reported 
killed, including the victims of My Lai, who were listed in the official 
body count: 

An examination of that whole operation would have revealed the 
incident at My Lai to be a particularly gruesome application of a 
wider policy which had the same effect in many places at many 
times. Of course, the blame for that could not have been dumped 
on a stumblebum lieutenant. Galley was an aberration, but 
“Wheeler Wallawa 5 * was not. 

The real issue concerning this operation, Buckley cabled to the U.S. 
office of Newsweek, was not the “indiscriminate use of firepower,” as 



198 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


is often alleged. Rather* “it is charges of quite discriminating use—as 
a matter of policy* in populated areas*” as in this operation or many 
others* among them Operation Speedy Express* with thousands of 
civilians murdered and many others driven to refugee and prison camps 
