and then deeper and deeper imo the forest as the bombing reached 
its peak in 1969 when jet planes came daily and destroyed all 
stationary structures* Nothing was left standing. The villagers 
lived in trenches and holes or in caves. They only farmed at night. 
[Each] of the informants* without any exception* had his village 
completely destroyed. In the last phase* bombings were aimed at 
the systematic destruction of the [material] basis of the civilian 
society. 12 

A staff study by a Kennedy subcommittee concluded that a main pur¬ 
pose of the U.S* bombardment was “to destroy the physical and social 
infrastructure*' in areas held by the Pathet Lao* a conclusion well 
supported by the factual record. 13 

There were also eyewitness reports of the destruction of northern 
Laos by Western reporters* but published overseas, T. D. Allman flew 
over the Plain of Jars in late 1971* reporting that “it is empty and 
ravaged” by the napalm and B-52 saturation bombing being “used in 
an attempt to extinguish all human life in the target area”; “All vegeta¬ 
tion has been destroyed and the craters* literally, are countless” and 
often impossible to distinguish among the “endless patches of churned 
earth* repeatedly bombed,” At the same time, the Washington Post 
published the statement of Air Force Secretary Robert Seamans* who 
reported from northern Laos that “I have seen no evidence of indis¬ 
criminate bombing”; it is the North Vietnamese who are “rough*” and 
the people are not “against the United States—just the opposite.” The 
Lao-speaking Australian reporter John Everingham traveled in 1970 
“through dying village after dying village” of the Hmong tribesmen 
who had been “naive enough to trust the CIA” and were now being 
offered “a one-way "copter ride to death' ” in the CIA clandestine army, 
in the remains of a country where bombing had “turned more than half 
the total area of Laos to a land of charred ruins where people fear the 
sky” so that “nothing be left standing or alive for the communists to 
inherit*” No U.S. journal, apart from the tiny pacifist press* was inter¬ 
ested enough to run his story* although later the media were to bewail 
the plight of the miserable remnants of the Hmong* put on display as 
“victims of Communism*” In 1970* the Bangkok World (Oct* 7) pub¬ 
lished an AP report on U.S, bombing that was “wiping out” towns, and 
by 1972 such reports sometimes appeared in the U.S* press* 14 Latex* 
Nayan Chanda visited the Plain of Jars* reporting overseas that from 
the air it “resembles a lunar landscape, pockmarked as it is with bomb 



THE INDOCHINA WARS < 11 ): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 259 


craters that are a stark testimony to the years of war that denuded the 
area of people and buildings'* during “six years of ‘secret 5 bombing” by 
U,S. aircraft, while “at ground level, the signs of death and destruction 
are even more ubiquitous,” including the provincial capital, “com¬ 
pletely razed,” as had been reported earlier by refugees who were 
ignored. Following the practice of American volunteers during the war, 
American relief workers with long experience in Laos attempted to 
bring information about postwar Laos to the media—with little effect— 
and inform us privately that their accounts were seriously distorted by 
New York Times reporters “by the device of omission and taking the 
negative side of balanced statements we made 5 * and similar means. 15 

The ILS, government officially denied all of this, continuing the 
deception even after the facts were exposed and known in some detail 
to those concerned enough to learn them. Many regarded the U.S. war 
in Laos as “a success” (Senators Jacob Javits and Stuart Symington), 
or even “A spectacular success ” (a former CIA officer in Laos, Thomas 
McCoy). 16 

In scale and care, the extensive analysis of refugee reports by a few 
young American volunteers in Laos compares very favorably to the 
subsequent studies of refugees from Cambodia that received massive 
publicity in the West after the Khmer Rouge takeover, and the story 
was both gruesome and highly pertinent to ongoing U.S. operations. 
But there was little interest, and published materials, which appeared 
primarily outside of the mainstream, were virtually ignored and quickly 
forgotten; the agency of terror was inappropriate for the needs of the 
doctrinal system. Media failure to report the facts when they were 
readily available, in 1968, and to investigate further when they were 
undeniable, by late 1969, contributed to the successful deception of the 
public, and to the continuing destruction. 

When the war ended, ABC News commentator Harry Reasoner 
expressed his hope that Laos and its “gentle folk” could return to 
peaceful ways after “the clowning of the CIA and the vicious invasion 
of the North Vietnamese. 5117 The “clowning of the CIA” included the 
destruction of “the rebel economy and social fabric 51 in northern Laos, 
with unknown numbers killed in areas that may never recover, and the 
decimation of the Hmong who were enlisted in the CIA cause and then 
abandoned when no longer useful. Nothing remotely comparable may 
be attributed to “the vicious invasion of the North Vietnamese”— 
which did, however, include such atrocities as killing twelve U.S, Air 
Force men in March 1968 at a U.S. radar base near the North Viet¬ 
namese border used to direct the bombing of North Vietnam and 
operations in North Vietnam by U.S.-led mercenaries. 10 



260 MANUFACTURING consent 


The New York Times reviewed the war in Laos at the war's end, 
concluding that 350,000 people had been killed, over a tenth of the 
