try” mercenaries, “presumably mostly Nationalist Chinese,” according 
to Kahin. These operations were officially “designed to result in sub¬ 
stantial destruction, economic loss, and harassment,” 95 On July 30-31, 
Saigon Navy vessels attacked North Vietnamese islands, eliciting an 
official DRV protest to the International Control Commission on July 
31. The U.S. destroyer MaddoXy conducting an electronic espionage 
operation in that general area, entered the twelve-mile zone regarded 
by North Vietnam as its territorial waters on August 2. The Maddox 
was challenged by North Vietnamese patrol boats, fired “warning 
shots,” and was hit by a single bullet in the ensuing battle, in which the 
patrol boats were damaged or destroyed by the destroyer and U.S. 
aircraft. On August 3, Secretary of State Dean Rusk sent a (secret) cable 
to Ambassador Taylor, stating that “We believe that present Op Plan 
34 A activities are beginning to rattle Hanoi, and Maddox incident is 
directly related to their efforts to resist these activities.” The Maddox 
was returned to the area along with the destroyer Turner Joy on August 
3, and on August 3 and 4 Saigon naval vessels bombarded North Viet¬ 
namese coastal facilities, “quite possibly one that the destroyer's elec¬ 
tronic surveillance had activated and located,” Kahin observes. There 
was some indication that the U.S. destroyers might have come under 
attack by North Vietnamese patrol boats on August 4, although Captain 
John Herrick of the Maddox was unsure, and radioed that reports 
“appear very doubtful” and that there were “No actual sightings by 
Maddox,” recommending “complete evaluation before any further ac¬ 
tion.” Subsequent evidence indicates that almost certainly no attack 
took place. 96 

On August 5, President Johnson publicly denounced the “open ag¬ 
gression on the high seas against the United States of America” by the 
North Vietnamese, while the DRV and China stated that “the so-called 
second Tonkin Gulf incident of 4 August never occurred” (Chinese 
government statement). On August 5, U.S. planes bombed North Viet¬ 
namese installations and destroyed North Vietnamese patrol boats. 
After testimony by Defense Secretary Robert McNamara in which he 
falsely claimed that the Maddox “was operating in international waters, 
was carrying out a routine patrol of the type we carry out all over the 
world at all times,” Congress passed a resolution authorizing the presi¬ 
dent to “take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against 
the forces of the United States and to prevent further aggression” (416 
to o in the House, Wayne Morse and Ernest Gruening alone in opposi¬ 
tion in the Senate). This August 7 resolution was subsequently ex- 



20 S MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


ploited as the basis for the escalation of the U.S* attack against Viet- 
nam 97 

