ally became president of the Salvadoran legislature, the U.S. mass 
media did not focus on his record as the probable organizer of the 
murder of Archbishop Romero and as the acknowledged leader of the 
death squads and a mass murderer. Even the open anti-Semitism of this 
Fascist was kept under the rug. 47 We would submit that if an anti- 


worthy and unworthy victims 59 


Semite and professional assassin, who was suspected of having orga¬ 
nized the murder of Popieluszko in Poland, ran for office and became 
head of the Polish legislature, there might have been a raised eyebrow 
or two in the U.S. media. 

Throughout this period, media coverage adopted a central myth 
contrived by the government, and confined its reporting and interpreta¬ 
tion to its basic premises: the “moderate government” that we support 
is plagued by the terrorism of the extremists of the left and right, and 
is unable to bring it under control. The U.S. government and the media 
understood very well that the violence was overwhelmingly the respon¬ 
sibility of both the U.S.-backed security forces, which were, and re¬ 
main, the real power in the country, and the paramilitary network they 
created to terrorize the population. But this truth was inexpressible. To 
this day the media maintain the central myth of earlier years, long after 
having conceded quietly that it was a complete fabrication. Reporting 
on the prospects for peace in El Salvador, Lindsey Gruson comments 
that “Today, death squads of the right and left no longer terrorize the 
population into submission and silence,” thanks to the success of Presi¬ 
dent Duarte and his U.S. supporters in moving the country toward 
democracy—exactly as a propaganda model would predict. 48 


2.4. COVERAGE OF THE 
SALVADORAN NATIONAL 
GUARDS’ MURDER OF THE 
FOUR U.S. 

CHURCHWOMEN AND 
ITS FOLLOW-UP 

On December 2, 1980, four U.S. churchwomen working in El Salva¬ 
dor—Maura Clarke, Jean Donovan, Ita Ford, and Dorothy Kazel— 
were seized, raped, and murdered by members of the Salvadoran 
National Guard. This crime was extremely inconvenient to the Carter 
administration, which was supporting the Salvadoran junta as an al¬ 
leged “reformist” government and trying to convince the public and 
Congress that that government was worthy of aid. While temporarily 
suspending military aid to El Salvador, the Carter administration 
sought a quick and low-keyed resolution of the case. It resumed aid at 
the drop of an announced rebel offensive, and—contrary to its pro¬ 
mises—before there was any investigatory response by the Salvadoran 



60 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


government* A commission headed by William P. Rogers was quickly 
sent to El Salvador to inquire into the facts and offer U.S. aid in an 
investigation. The commission reported that it had “no evidence sug¬ 
gesting that any senior Salvadoran authorities were implicated in the 
murders themselves,” but there is no indication that it ascertained this 
by any route beyond asking the authorities whether they were involved* 
The commission acknowledged that justice was not thriving in El Sal¬ 
vador, 49 but it proposed no independent investigation, merely urging 
'the Salvadoran junta to pursue the case vigorously* It noted that the 
junta promised that the truth “would be pursued wherever it led any¬ 
where in the country at any level*” 50 Rogers was later to concede that 
perhaps he was a bit optimistic in expecting the Salvadoran junta to 
pursue the case seriously* 51 

With the arrival of the Reagan administration, the already badly 
compromised concern to find the culprits diminished further, and the 
dominance of the interest in protecting the client regime in El Salvador 
became still more overwhelming* It was quickly clear that the whole 
business could be forgotten—along with the thousands of Salvadorans 
already killed—except for the demands of public relations. The willing¬ 
ness to support any feasible cover-up was also quite evident. Secretary 
of State Alexander Haig stated before the House Committee on Foreign 
Affairs that the evidence “led one to believe” that the four women were 
killed trying to run a roadblock—a shameless lie that was soon acknowl¬ 
edged as such by the State Department, 52 The Reagan ambassador to 
the UN, Jeane Kirkpatrick, went Haig one better, suggesting that the 
four women were political activists for the “Frente”—as with Haig’s 
statement, an outright lie—hinting quite broadly that they were fair 
game* 53 

Although Kirkpatrick also asserted that the Salvadoran government 
“unequivocally” was “not responsible” for the murders, evidence was 
soon available that showed that members of the National Guard had 
killed the four women. The administration then moved to the position 
that it was clear that the local guardsmen had “acted alone,” This was 
asserted and reiterated despite the absence of any supportive investiga¬ 
tion, and important leads suggesting the contrary were ignored. A 
propaganda model would expect that this preferred government expla¬ 
nation would be honored by the mass media, and that in contrast with 
the Popieluszko case, where useful points could be scored by searching 
for villainy at the top, the mass media would now be less eager to find 
that which their government was anxious to avoid. 
