of human lives and massive material destruction; the rigidity and 
nastiness of the un-Cambodian like fellows in black who run this 
country now, or what is left of it, are as much a product of this 
wholesale American bombing which has hardened and honed their 
minds as they are a product of Marx and Mao* * . * [The mass 
evacuation of the cities] does not constitute a deliberate campaign 
of terror, rather it points to poor organisation, lack of vision and 
the brutalisation of a people by a long and savage war. . . * The 



THE INDOCHINA WARS ( 11 ); LAOS AND CAMBODIA 279 


war damage here [in the countryside], as everywhere else we saw, 
is total. Not a bridge is standing, hardly a house. I am told most 
villagers have spent the war years living semipermanently under¬ 
ground in earth bunkers to escape the bombing. . . . The entire 
countryside has been churned up by American B-52 bomb craters, 
whole towns and villages razed. So far I have not seen one intact 
pagoda. 70 

The conditions are much like those reported in 1970 by refugees from 
the Plain of Jars, in Laos; in both cases, these accounts were almost 
entirely excluded from the mainstream media. 

So ended phase I of the genocide. In later years, those who had 
transmitted narrowly selected fragments of this tale of horror expressed 
their bitterness that Cambodia had been “forgotten,” On the tenth 
anniversary of the Khmer Rouge takeover, Sydney Schanberg wrote 
two columns in the New York Times entitled “Cambodia Forgotten.” 
The first highlights the phrase: “Superpowers care as little today about 
Cambodians as in 1970,” the second dismisses Richard Nixon 5 s 1985 
claim that there was no “indiscriminate terror bombing” but only 
“highly accurate 5 * strikes “against enemy military targets. 55 Schanberg 
comments that “Anyone who visited the refugee camps in Cambodia 
and talked to the civilian survivors of the bombing learned quickly 
about the substantial casualties. 51 He recalls that “the Khmer Rouge 
were a meaningless force when the war was brought to Cambodia in 
1970. ... In order to flourish and grow, they needed a war to feed on. 
And the superpowers—including this country, with the Nixon incur¬ 
sion of 1970 and the massive bombing that followed—provided that war 
and that nurturing material. 55 He does not, however, inform us about 
which superpower, apart from “this country, 55 invaded Cambodia and 
subjected it to massive bombing. With comparable even-handedness we 
might deplore the contribution of the superpowers, including the 
USSR, to the destruction of Afghanistan, or the attitude of the great 
powers, including Nazi Germany, toward the victims of the death 
camps, whom Schanberg brings up in a later column the same month 
entitled “Memory is the Answer.” He also does not comment on what 
