irrigation in 1983; in 1981, the U.S. government sought to block a ship¬ 
ment of school supplies and educational kits to Cambodia by the Men- 
nonite Church. 184 

A tiny report in the Christian Science Monitor observes that the 
United States is blocking international shipments of food to Vietnam 
during a postwar famine* using the food weapon “to punish Vietnam 
for its occupation of Cambodia,” according to diplomatic sources. Two 
days later* Times correspondent Henry Kamm concluded his tour of 
duty as chief Asian diplomatic correspondent with a long article in 
which he comments “sadly” on the “considerably reduced quality of 



14 $ MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


life” in Indochina, where in Vietnam "even working animals are rare,” 
for unexplained reasons, in contrast to "the continuing rise, however 
uneven in many aspects, of the standard of living” elsewhere in the 
region* In thirty-five paragraphs, he manages to produce not one word 
on the effects of the U.S* war or the postwar policy of "bleeding 
Vietnam,” as the Far Eastern Economic Review accurately terms it* 185 
The major television retrospective on the war was the award-winning 
thirteen-part PBS "Television History” of 1983, produced with the 
cooperation of British and French television, followed by a "Vietnam 
Op/Ed” in 1985 that included the Accuracy in Media critique and 
discussion of the two documentaries by a group tilted heavily toward 
the hawks. 186 The controversy had well-defined bounds* At one ex¬ 
treme, there were those who defended the PBS series as fair and accu¬ 
rate; at the other, critics who claimed that it presented “a war of the 
good nationalists, represented by Ho Chi Minh, versus the evil imperi¬ 
alist Americans who are trying to quash, sit on, the legitimate aspira¬ 
tions of the South Vietnamese people” (AIM chairman Reed Irvine). 
The moderator, "the man in the middle,” concluded the discussion by 
stressing the importance of allowing "conflicting views about the Viet¬ 
nam war to be presented at a time when the nation as a whole is finally 
allowing itself a close look at the only war we have ever lost,” We will 
not review the AIM critique 187 or the "debate,” which reiterates many 
of the charges we have already discussed (for example, Irvine's sole 
example of how “the enemy was able to use our free, uncontrolled 
media to achieve their own objectives,” namely, via the media's por¬ 
trayal of the Tet offensive "as a defeat for our side, even though it was 
actually a very outstanding military victory”)* More to the point here 
are the contents of the PBS series itself, and the fact that it sets the 
bounds on critical analysis of the "failed crusade” undertaken for mo¬ 
tives that were "noble,” although “illusory,” as the PBS companion 
volume describes the U,S. effort "to defend South Vietnam’s indepen¬ 
dence*” 188 

With regard to the American war, the PBS series makes a conscious 
effort to be balanced, to present all sides, to take no side* The French, 
in contrast, are treated far more harshly, as brutal colonialists, with no 
pretense of balance* Peter Biskind comments: 

Whereas the narrator referred to Ho Chi Minh and his followers 
as "rebels,” "nationalists,” or "the Vietnamese resistance,” as long 
as they were fighting the French, once the Americans arrive they 
are invariably "Communists” or just "the enemy.” Whereas Bao 
Dai is the “playboy emperor picked by the French,” Nguyen Cao 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (l): VIETNAM 249 


Ky and Nguyen Van Thieu are simply the “government.” 
Whereas French troops just released from Japanese prison camps 
go “on a rampage, arresting and attacking Vietnamese,” American 
troops engage in the was-it-or-wasn’t-it massacre at Thuy Bo. 

The effort to maintain balance is illustrated, for example, in the narra¬ 
tor’s concluding words to episode 4, covering Johnson’s escalation of 
the war in 1964-65 and the first appearance of North Vietnamese units 
in the South in mid-1965. After presenting Lyndon Johnson and other 
U.S. government spokesmen, the narrator states: 

Johnson called it invasion. Hanoi called it liberation. In the fall 
of 1965, three North Vietnamese regiments massed in the Central 
Highlands. Nearly two years had passed since Johnson renewed 
the U.S. commitment to defend South Vietnam. Nearly two years 
had passed since Ho Chi Minh renewed his commitment to liber¬ 
ate the South. Now their two armies braced for battle.... For the 
first time, in the Battle of the la Drang Valley, Americans fought 
the North Vietnamese—face to face. For the first time, B-52S 
supported troops in the field. And for the first time, to Americans, 
Vietnam meant a major new war. 

Here we have “balance,” but of a special kind. One may believe, with 
Johnson, that North Vietnam is invading the South, or, with Ho, that 
North Vietnam is fighting to liberate the South. We may not believe, 
however, that the United States is invading South Vietnam, which, we 
learn two episodes later, it had been bombing since 1961. Rather, we 
must assume, as a given fact not subject to debate, that the U.S. com¬ 
mitment was “to defend South Vietnam.” 

To evaluate this effort at “balance,” we may observe that during the 
preceding summer (1965), five months after the United States began the 
regular bombing of North Vietnam, the Pentagon estimated that the 
60,000 U.S. troops then deployed faced an enemy combat force of 
