Michael Ledeen, a neoconservative activist and disinformationist* 
with ready access to the Times 3 has also received its close protection. 
His book Grave New World was reviewed in the Times by William 
Griffith* a Reader's Digest “roving editor” and right-wing MIT political 
scientist who found Ledeen’s version of the Bulgarian Connection 
entirely convincing. 41 Ledeen was deeply involved with Francesco Pa- 
zienza in the “Billygate” affair and had numerous contacts with Italian 
intelligence and the Italian extreme right. The Italian Fascist and head 
of P-2* Licio Gelli, hiding in Uruguay* instructed one of his accom¬ 
plices to convey a manuscript to Ledeen. Pazienza claimed (and SISMI 
head Santovito confirmed) that Ledeen was a member of the Italian 
intelligence agency SISMI, with code number Z-3. Ledeen received 
over $100,000 from SISMI for services rendered* including the supply¬ 
ing of stale U.S. intelligence reports that SISMI then passed off as its 
own. Ledeen funneled this money into a Bermuda bank account. His 
manipulative activities in Italy were on such a scale that in the summer 
of 1984 a newly appointed head of SISMI told the Italian parliament 
that Ledeen was a “meddler” and persona non grata in Italy. 42 None of 
these points was ever disclosed in the Times, 4 * 


4.6. THE PROPAGANDA 
AGENDA: QUESTIONS 
UNASKED, SOURCES UNTAPPED 

There is a close linkage among sources used, frames of reference, and 
agendas of the newsworthy. When the mass media chose to use Sterling, 
Henze* and Ledeen heavily, they simultaneously adopted a frame of 
reference in which the Bulgarians and Soviets were presumed guilty, 
Agca was an apolitical mercenary* and justice was being promoted by 
diligent Judge Martella in free-world Italy. In the propaganda cam¬ 
paign that ensued, hard questions about the quality of the SHK model 
were simply not asked, and alternative sources and frames were ig¬ 
nored, 

A distinction between matters on and off the agenda, such as we used 
in the previous chapter, is once again applicable and illuminating, “On 
the agenda” are statements by Agca and Martella about Agca’s latest 


1 


162 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 

claims and proofs of Bulgarian involvement, Brzezinski’s opinion on 
whether the Bulgarians are likely to have engaged in such an escapade 
(they were), or Judy Woodruffs question to Paul Henze as to whether 
the Soviets "‘would have any notion, any desire to try this again” (they 
do this kind of thing all the time—just got a little careless here because 
