
1.2. THE ADVERTISING 
LICENSE TO DO BUSINESS: 

THE SECOND FILTER 

In arguing for the benefits of the free market as a means of controlling 
dissident opinion in the mid-nineteenth century, the Liberal chancellor 
of the British exchequer, Sir George Lewis, noted that the market 
would promote those papers “enjoying the preference of the advertising 
public.” 41 Advertising did, in fact, serve as a powerful mechanism 
weakening the working-class press. Curran and Seaton give the growth 
of advertising a status comparable with the increase in capital costs as 
a factor allowing the market to accomplish what state taxes and harass¬ 
ment failed to do, noting that these “advertisers thus acquired a de facto 
licensing authority since, without their support, newspapers ceased to 
be economically viable,” 42 

Before advertising became prominent, the price of a newspaper had 
to cover the costs of doing business. With the growth of advertising, 
papers that attracted ads could afford a copy price well below produc¬ 
tion costs. This put papers lacking in advertising at a serious disadvan¬ 
tage: their prices would tend to be higher, curtailing sales, and they 
would have less surplus to invest in improving the salability of the paper 
(features, attractive format, promotion, etc.). For this reason, an adver¬ 
tising-based system will tend to drive out of existence or into marginal- 
ity the media companies and types that depend on revenue from sales 
alone. With advertising, the free market does not yield a neutral system 
in which final buyer choice decides. The advertisers* choices influence 
media prosperity and survival. 43 The ad-based media receive an adver¬ 
tising subsidy that gives them a price-marketing-quality edge, which 
allows them to encroach on and further weaken their ad-free (or ad- 
disadvantaged) rivals. 44 Even if ad-based media cater to an affluent 
(“upscale”) audience, they easily pick up a large part of the “down- 



A PROPAGANDA MODEL 15 


scale” audience* and their rivals lose market share and are eventually 
driven out or marginalized* 

In fact* advertising has played a potent role in increasing concentra¬ 
tion even among rivals that focus with equal energy on seeking advertis¬ 
ing revenue. A market share and advertising edge on the part of one 
paper or television station will give it additional revenue to compete 
more effectively—promote more aggressively* buy more salable fea¬ 
tures and programs—and the disadvantaged rival must add expenses it 
cannot afford to try to stem the cumulative process of dwindling market 
