the working of the filters* but the result is the same as if a commissar 
had instructed the media: “Concentrate on the victims of enemy powers 
and forget about the victims of friends.” 119 

Reports of the abuses of worthy victims not only pass through the 
filters; they may also become the basis of sustained propaganda cam¬ 
paigns. If the government or corporate community and the media feel 
that a story is useful as well as dramatic* they focus on it intensively 
and use it to enlighten the public- This was true, for example* of the 
shooting down by the Soviets of the Korean airliner KAL 007 in early 
September 1983, which permitted an extended campaign of denigration 
of an official enemy and greatly advanced Reagan administration arms 
plans. As Bernard Gwertzman noted complacently in the New York 
Times of August 31* 1984* U.S. officials "assert that worldwide criticism 
of the Soviet handling of the crisis has strengthened the United States 
in its relations with Moscow,” In sharp contrast, the shooting down by 
Israel of a Libyan civilian airliner in February 1973 led to no outcry in 
the West* no denunciations for “cold-blooded murder*” 120 and no boy¬ 
cott. This difference in treatment was explained by the New York Times 
precisely on the grounds of utility: “No useful purpose is served by an 
acrimonious debate over the assignment of blame for the downing of 
a Libyan airliner in the Sinai peninsula last week.” 121 There was a very 
“useful purpose” served by focusing on the Soviet act* and a massive 
propaganda campaign ensued. 122 

Propaganda campaigns in general have been closely attuned to elite 
interests. The Red scare of 1919-20 served well to abort the union¬ 
organizing drive that followed World War I in the steel and other 
industries. The Trutnan-McCarthy Red scare helped inaugurate the 
Cold War and the permanent war economy, and it also served to 
weaken the progressive coalition of the New Deal years. The chronic 
focus on the plight of Soviet dissidents, on enemy killings in Cambodia* 
and on the Bulgarian Connection helped weaken the Vietnam syn¬ 
drome, justify a huge arms buildup and a more aggressive foreign 
policy, and divert attention from the upward redistribution of income 
that was the heart of Reagan's domestic economic program. 123 The 
recent propaganda-disinformation attacks on Nicaragua have been 



A propaganda model 33 


needed to avert eyes from the savagery of the war in El Salvador and 
to justify the escalating U.S. investment in counterrevolution in Central 
America. 

Conversely, propaganda campaigns will not be mobilized where vic¬ 
timization, even though massive, sustained, and dramatic, fails to meet 
the test of utility to elite interests. Thus, while the focus on Cambodia 
