tional assembly, along with four candidates of the left-leaning neutral¬ 
ists ("‘fellow travelers,” as they were called by Ambassador Parsons). 
Thus “Communists or fellow travelers” won thirteen of the twenty-one 
seats contested. The largest vote went to the leader of the Pathet Lao, 
Prince Souphanouvong, who was elected chairman of the national 
assembly, 

U.S. pressures—including, crucially, the withdrawal of aid—quickly 
led to the overthrow of the government in a coup by a “pro-Western 
neutralist” who pledged his allegiance to “the free world” and declared 
his intention to disband the political party of the Pathet Lao (Neo Lao 
Hak Sat, or NLHS), scrapping the agreements that had successfully 
established the coalition. He was overthrown in turn by the CIA favor* 
ite, the ultra-right-wing General Phoumi Nosavan. After U.S. clients 
won the i960 elections, rigged so crudely that even the most pro-U,S. 
observers were appalled, civil war broke out, with the USSR and China 
backing a coalition extending over virtually the entire political spec¬ 
trum apart from the extreme right, which was backed by the United 
States, The U.S, government assessment was that “By the spring of 1961 
the NLHS appeared to be in a position to take over the entire country,” 
primarily because of its control of the countryside, where it had “dili¬ 
gently built up an organization covering most of the country's ten 
thousand villages,” as noted ruefully by the bitterly anti-Communist 
Australian journalist Denis Warner. 2 The problem was the familiar one: 
the United States and its clients were militarily strong but politically 
weak. 

Recognizing that its policies were in a shambles, the United States 
agreed to take part in a new Geneva conference, which proposed a new 
settlement in 1962, This too quickly broke down, and the civil war 
resumed with a different line-up and with increasing intervention by the 
United States and its allies, and by North Vietnam, in the context of 
the expanding war in Vietnam, U.S, clandestine military operations 
began in 1961, and the regular U.S, bombing began in early 1964: 
Operation Barrel Roil, directed against northern Laos, was initiated in 
December 1964, several months before the regular bombing of North 
Vietnam. The bombing of northern Laos was intensified in 1966, reach¬ 
ing extraordinary levels from 1968 with the “bombing halt” in North 






THE INDOCHINA WARS (il): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 255 


Vietnam—in reality* a bombing redistribution* the planes being shifted 
to the destruction of Laos, 3 

Media coverage of Laos during the earlier period was sometimes 
extensive—over three times as great as of Vietnam in the New York 
Times in 1961, the Pentagon Papers analyst observes* But its contents 
were often absurd* For example, the aid cut-off that was the essential 
factor in the U*S, subversion of the elected government of Laos in 1958 
“was never even reported in the national press*” which barely men¬ 
tioned the events, and then with misleading commentary reflecting 
Washington deceit. 4 Bernard Fall gave a detailed and derisive exposure 
of some of the more ludicrous incidents* including inflammatory fabri¬ 
cations that helped create major crises and led to deeper U*S* involve¬ 
ment in Thailand and Indochina* Joseph Alsop’s fevered reports of 
largely invented Communist military actions were particularly note¬ 
worthy* 5 

As the Vietnam War escalated* Laos became “only the wan on the 
hog of Vietnam*” as Dean Rusk put it* a “sideshow war*” in Walter 
Haney’s phrase, as Cambodia was to be later on. Media coverage de¬ 
clined as the “sideshow war” escalated. There were* in fact, three 
distinct U*S* wars: the bombing of the Ho Chi Minh trail in the South; 
the bombing of the peasant society of northern Laos, which the U,S, 
government conceded was unrelated to the war in South Vietnam; and 
the “clandestine war” between a CIA-run mercenary force based on 
mountain tribesmen and the Pathet Lao, backed by North Vietnam 
apparently at about the level of the Thai and other mercenaries intro¬ 
duced by the United States* The bombing of southern Laos was re¬ 
ported; the clandestine war and the bombing of northern Laos were not* 
apart from tales about North Vietnamese aggression* often fanciful and 
subjected to no critical analysis. 6 

In July 1968, the Southeast Asia correspondent oiLeMonde y Jacques 
Decornoy* published lengthy eyewitness reports of the bombing of 
northern Laos* which had become “* * . a world without noise* for the 
surrounding villages have disappeared, the inhabitants themselves liv¬ 
ing hidden in the mountains . * * it is dangerous to lean out at any time 
of the night or day” because of the ceaseless bombardment that leads 
to “the scientific destruction of the areas held by the enemy,” He 
describes “the motionless ruins and deserted houses” of the capital of 
Sam Neua district, first bombed by the U*S, Air Force in February 1965, 
Much of this “population center” had been “razed to the ground” by 
bombing* and as he arrived he observed the smoking ruins from recent 
raids with phosphorus bombs* the “enormous craters” everywhere in 
the town* the churches and houses “demolished*” the remnants of U*S* 



256 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


fragmentation bombs dropped to maximize civilian casualties. From 
this town to a distance of thirty kilometers* “no house in the villages 
