The repression in 1980 reached a magnitude surpassed only by the 
[first] maianza and was far worse than anything imagined under 
General Romero. ... By the end of the year the number [mur¬ 
dered] had reached at least 9,000- Every day mutilated bodies, 
missing arms or heads, were found: behind shopping centers; 
stuffed in burlap bags and left on dusty rural roads; hurled over 
cliffs into ravines. 42 

And through all of this, Duarte not only provided the facade of “re¬ 
form,” he regularly complimented the army for its loyal service. In a 
letter published in the Miami Herald on November 9, 1981, Duarte 
wrote that 

The armed forces are waging a heroic battle against a cruel and 
pitiless enemy supported by great resources of ideological aggres¬ 
sion. This goes parallel with armed aggression. . . . This would 
be one more prey in the conquest plan in the Central Ameri¬ 
can region that Moscow has designed to pursue. Immediately 
after that its greatest reward would be the North American na¬ 
tion. . . . 

In brief, the Salvadoran public was never offered the option that the 
press itself acknowledged the voters craved. 

In Guatemala, as in El Salvador, no parties of the left participated 
in the 1984 election for a constituent assembly, and only one crippled 
party made a tentative but wholly ineffectual foray in the 1985 presiden¬ 
tial election. 43 The main guerrilla movements were, of course, outside 
the electoral orbit. Their leaders would have been killed if ap¬ 
prehended, but they would not have participated anyway without a 
drastic alteration in basic social and electoral conditions. 44 Even a 
centrist party like the Christian Democrats had suffered scores of mur¬ 
ders in the years 1980-83, and the current president of Guatemala, the 
Christian Democrat Vinicio Cerezo, survived three known assassina¬ 
tion attempts. No seriously left party could have qualified in 1984-85 
under the laws of “illicit association” mentioned earlier. 

The peasant majority was not represented or spoken for by any 
candidate. The Guatemalan Human Rights Commission, an organiza- 



LEGITIMIZING VERSUS MEANINGLESS THIRD WORLD ELECTIONS 10 3 


tion not able to function within Guatemala* has pointed out that na¬ 
tional political parties that speak for major groups like the working class 
or indigenous people “do not exist and ,., as a result* these sectors are 
institutionally excluded from the political system.” 45 Americas Watch 
states that one of the civil-patrol system’s functions is “to provide 
vigilance and control of the local population* preventing any form of 
independent political organization,” 46 This exclusion of the peasantry 
from any political opportunity was reflected in two ways in the 1984-85 
elections. One was that in registering for the election* only 3 percent 
of the electorate signed up as members of political parries. Another* 
more compelling* is that no candidate in the election urged land reform* 
although this was one of the two central issues in Guatemala (the other 
being unconstrained army murder* also not an issue in the election* 
given the understanding on all sides that the army will remain the ruling 
force* whoever gains office). 

As with Duane in El Salvador, the presence of Vinicio Cerezo as a 
candidate, and as the eventual winner in the 1985 election, raises the 
question of whether, despite the constraints on the left* Cerezo did not 
really offer a significant option to the voting public, Cerezo differen¬ 
tiated himself from his electoral rivals* especially toward the end of the 
campaign and the runoff, by expressing compassion for the masses and 
a determination to make changes in the human-rights picture and mass 
poverty. He occasionally mentioned the need for structural reform* 
although he was not specific and stressed that the first requirement was 
to reestablish civilian control. He was quite clear, however, that if he 
were elected, his power would be nominal at first and would have to 
be enlarged while he was in office: 

The election will not bring automatic transfer of real power to the 
president. There will be a handover of formal power. What are my 
chances of consolidating that power? Fifty-fifty. 47 

During the election campaign* Cerezo never straightforwardly ad¬ 
dressed the question of land reform* and news reports in Guatemala 
suggested that he had promised the landowners’ lobby that land reform 
was not on his agenda, 48 Similarly, he did not promise any legal action 
against those who had murdered thousands* nor did he say that he 
would dismantle the counterinsurgency state. There would seem to 
have been at least a tacit understanding between Cerezo and the mili¬ 
tary that he would protect them against prosecution and preserve their 
power and relative autonomy; in fact, he could not do otherwise and 
survive. 49 In the year and a half that has elapsed since he took office* 




104 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


Cerezo has made no meaningful move toward land reform, has sup¬ 
ported the army vigorously against any accounting, and has made no 
move to dismantle the civil patrols, the development poles, and other 
features of institutionalized terror* 50 The human-rights situation in 
Guatemala “remains terrible,” 51 although improved (but partly because 
