
26 $ MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


ported by the United States. 41 Throughout this period* Sihanouk at¬ 
tempted a difficult balancing act both internally and externally. Within 
Cambodia, he repressed the left and peasant uprisings and attempted 
to hold off the right, although power largely remained in the hands of 
right-wing urban elites throughout. Externally, he tried to preserve a 
measure of neutrality against the background of the expanding Indo¬ 
china war, which, he expected, would end in a Communist victory, 42 

Sihanouk’s neutralist efforts were unappreciated by the United 
States and its allies. Diem’s troops attacked border regions from 1957, 
and there were also Thai provocations, A coup attempt in 1959, proba¬ 
bly backed by the CIA, as generally assumed in Cambodia, was foiled; 
this should be seen in the context of general U.S, subversion in the 
region in the post-Geneva period, including a CIA-backed coup and 
invasion aimed at overthrowing Sukarno in Indonesia in 1958, subver¬ 
sion of the elected government of Laos in the same year, and the efforts 
to destroy the anti-French resistance within South Vietnam and to 
Consolidate the Diem dictatorship while undermining the political ar¬ 
rangements at Geneva. By 1963, CIA-backed Khmer Serei forces fre¬ 
quently attacked Cambodia from South Vietnamese and Thai bases at 
a time when the United States was intensifying its clandestine opera¬ 
tions in Laos and maneuvering, with increasing violence, to block a 
political settlement in South Vietnam. By 1966, the Khmer Serei “de¬ 
clared war on Cambodia and claimed responsibility for incursions 
across the border.” 43 

Attacks by U.S, and Saigon army forces against border posts and 
villages in Cambodia intensified from the early 1960s, causing hundreds 
of casualties a year. Later, Vietnamese peasants and guerrillas fled for 
refuge to border areas in Cambodia, particularly after the murderous 
U.S. military operations in South Vietnam in early 1967, giving rise to 
cynical charges from Washington, echoed in the media, about Commu¬ 
nist encroachment into neutral Cambodia. By the time of the 1970 coup 
that overthrew Sihanouk, Vietnamese were scattered along border areas 
to a maximum depth of about twenty-five kilometers, according to most 
sources. The first evidence of Vietnamese encampments in Cambodia 
was discovered in late 1967, close to the unmarked border. While there 
was much outrage in the United States about “North Vietnamese ag¬ 
gression,” the internal view in Washington was considerably more 
nuanced. From the Pentagon Papers we learn that as late as May 1967— 
well after the U.S. operations that caused cross-border flight—high 
Pentagon officials believed that Cambodia was “becoming more and 
more important as a supply base—now of food and medicines, perhaps 
ammunition later,” A year earlier, an American study team investigated 





THE INDOCHINA WARS (il): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 269 


specific charges by the U.S. government on the scene and found them 
without substance although they did come across the site of a recent 
U.S. helicopter-gunship attack on a Cambodian village (one of many, 
according to the local population), first denied by the U.S. government* 
then conceded* since American eyewitnesses (including CBS-TV) were 
present—the usual pattern. 

The Cambodian government reported many such incidents. Thus 
Cambodia complained to the United Nations that on February 24,1967, 
“a large number of armed forces elements consisting of Americans, 
South Vietnamese and South Koreans entered Cambodian territory 
and fired heavily on the Khmer village of Chrak Kranh .,, [which] was 
then invaded and burnt by the United States-South Vietnamese 
troops” who occupied the village until March 3. By April 1969, rubber 
plantations were subjected to defoliation by air attack. In January 1970, 
an official Cambodian government White Paper reported thousands of 
such incidents with many deaths, giving pictures, dates, and other 
details, and also noting that not a single Viet Cong body had ever been 
found after U.S.-Saigon bombardments or ground attacks. 

Virtually none of this was ever reported in the United States—even 
the official White Paper—although the information was readily availa¬ 
ble in official documents and reputable foreign sources, and in easily 
ignored peace-movement literature. 44 The agency of violence was once 
again the wrong one. 

The occasional media reaction to these incursions was instructive. 
On March 25,1964, New York Times correspondent Max Frankel, now 
executive editor, reported a Saigon army (ARVN) attack on the Cam¬ 
bodian village of Chantrea with armored cars and bombers, leaving 
many villagers killed and wounded. The ARVN forces were accom¬ 
panied by U.S. advisers, including a U,S. army pilot “dragged from the 
wreckage” of an observer plane “shot down in the action/ 1 Diplomats 
on the scene confirmed that “at least one troop-carrying helicopter had 
landed at Chantrea with three Americans on board.” Frankel was out¬ 
raged—at Cambodia, which had the gall to demand reparations, leaving 
Washington “alarmed and saddened, but confused,” The headline 
reads: “Stomping on U.S. Toes: Cambodia Typical of Many Small 
Nations Putting Strain on a Policy of Patience,” Cambodia has “bor¬ 
rowed a leaf from Fidel Castro’s book,” Frankel stormed, by requesting 
compensation for this U.S. atrocity: “It is open season again for the 
weaker nations to stomp on the toes of big ones, . . . Leading the pack 
in big-power baiting these days is one of the smallest of nations, the 
Southeast Asian kingdom of Cambodia” with its “clever, headstrong, 
