


THE INDOCHINA WARS (il): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 269 


specific charges by the U.S. government on the scene and found them 
without substance although they did come across the site of a recent 
U.S. helicopter-gunship attack on a Cambodian village (one of many, 
according to the local population), first denied by the U.S. government* 
then conceded* since American eyewitnesses (including CBS-TV) were 
present—the usual pattern. 

The Cambodian government reported many such incidents. Thus 
Cambodia complained to the United Nations that on February 24,1967, 
“a large number of armed forces elements consisting of Americans, 
South Vietnamese and South Koreans entered Cambodian territory 
and fired heavily on the Khmer village of Chrak Kranh .,, [which] was 
then invaded and burnt by the United States-South Vietnamese 
troops” who occupied the village until March 3. By April 1969, rubber 
plantations were subjected to defoliation by air attack. In January 1970, 
an official Cambodian government White Paper reported thousands of 
such incidents with many deaths, giving pictures, dates, and other 
details, and also noting that not a single Viet Cong body had ever been 
found after U.S.-Saigon bombardments or ground attacks. 

Virtually none of this was ever reported in the United States—even 
the official White Paper—although the information was readily availa¬ 
ble in official documents and reputable foreign sources, and in easily 
ignored peace-movement literature. 44 The agency of violence was once 
again the wrong one. 

The occasional media reaction to these incursions was instructive. 
On March 25,1964, New York Times correspondent Max Frankel, now 
executive editor, reported a Saigon army (ARVN) attack on the Cam¬ 
bodian village of Chantrea with armored cars and bombers, leaving 
many villagers killed and wounded. The ARVN forces were accom¬ 
panied by U.S. advisers, including a U,S. army pilot “dragged from the 
wreckage” of an observer plane “shot down in the action/ 1 Diplomats 
on the scene confirmed that “at least one troop-carrying helicopter had 
landed at Chantrea with three Americans on board.” Frankel was out¬ 
raged—at Cambodia, which had the gall to demand reparations, leaving 
Washington “alarmed and saddened, but confused,” The headline 
reads: “Stomping on U.S. Toes: Cambodia Typical of Many Small 
Nations Putting Strain on a Policy of Patience,” Cambodia has “bor¬ 
rowed a leaf from Fidel Castro’s book,” Frankel stormed, by requesting 
compensation for this U.S. atrocity: “It is open season again for the 
weaker nations to stomp on the toes of big ones, . . . Leading the pack 
in big-power baiting these days is one of the smallest of nations, the 
Southeast Asian kingdom of Cambodia” with its “clever, headstrong, 
