people did not feel intimidated/* 25 

Freedom of assembly in Nicaragua was somewhat limited by harass¬ 
ment, but, once again, it was not ruled out by state terror, as was the 
case in El Salvador and Guatemala. The LASA delegation examined 
in detail the charges of Sandinista harassment of opposition-group 
meetings and found them largely unfounded, concluding that the con¬ 
testing parties “were able to hold the vast majority of their rallies 
unimpeded by pro-FSLN demonstrations. . . .” 26 

Our conclusion is that the first basic condition of a free election was - 
partially met in Nicaragua, but was not met at all in El Salvador and 
Guatemala. 


3.2*2. Freedom of the press. 

In El Salvador, the only substantial newspapers critical of the govern¬ 
ment, La Cronica del Pueblo and El Independiente —neither by any 
means radical papers—were closed in July 1980 and January 1981, re¬ 
spectively, the first because its top editor and two employees were 
murdered and mutilated by the security forces, the second because the 
army arrested its personnel and destroyed its plant. The church paper 
and radio station were repeatedly shut down by bombing attacks. No 
paper or station representing the principal opposition has been able to 
operate except clandestinely. Over thirty journalists have been mur¬ 
dered in El Salvador since the revolutionary junta took power. An 
intensified campaign against the press occurred just prior to the 1982 
election. On March 10, a death list of thirty-five journalists was cir¬ 
culated by a “death squad,” and on March 18 the mutilated bodies of 
four Dutch journalists were recovered. 27 None of the murders of jour¬ 
nalists in El Salvador was ever “solved”—they were essentially murders 
carried out under the auspices of the state. 

In Guatemala, forty-eight journalists were murdered between 1978 
and I9S5, 2S and many others have been kidnapped and threatened. 
These killings, kidnappings, and threats have been a primary means of 
control of the media. As in El Salvador, nobody has yet been ap¬ 
prehended and tried for any of these crimes, which must be viewed as 





9 & MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


murders carried out by the state or with state approval. There are no 
papers or radio or television stations in Guatemala that express the 
views of the rebels or the majority Indian population or the lower 
