


WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS 69 


blatantly prejudged the case. The only plausible rationale for the U.S, 
cover-up is that the administration wanted to minimize adverse public* 
ity concerning the performance of its murderous client. Information on 
what was really going on* or its own internal analyses of the case or 
appraisals of the Salvadoran legal process, would make the client look 
bad. The administration hoped that the case would “go away,” but until 
that happened, it wanted the publicity flow to be under its control. 

Part of the reason the administration wanted control was to allow it 
to claim reasonable progress in the pursuit of the case whenever the 
military government was due for more money. As with other right-wing 
satellites, “improvement” is always found at money-crunch time. In its 
July 1982 certification report, the State Department found that “sub¬ 
stantial progress” had been made in the case and predicted a trial in 
the fall of 1982. In early 1983, the certification report noted “significant 
developments” in the case. This manipulation of evidence to protect 
the flow of arms and money to the regime would not be easy with full 
disclosure—or with a critical and honest press. 

This cover-up of the Salvadoran judicial process* even though four 
murdered American women were involved, did not arouse the press to 
indignation or satire, nor did it cause them to provide more than mini¬ 
mal coverage of the inquiry. 


2.4.4. The trial — five national 
guardsmen for $19.4 million 

The trial of the five immediate killers of the four women should have 
been presented in a Kafkaesque framework, but the U,S, media played 
it very straight. The trial took place three-and-a-half years after the 
acts of murder, despite the fact that the iriggermen were immediately 
identified and despite enormous U,S. pressure. Two of three judges 
assigned to the case had resigned out of fear for their Jives, and the only 
independent defense attorney had fled the country after a session of 
torture at National Guard headquarters. The defense at the trial made 
no effort to defend the men on the grounds of “orders from above,” 
although this is a standard defense in such cases, and significant evi¬ 
dence was available for use in this instance. The mass media failed to 
note the point, although it suggests fear, a deal, or both, and although, 
as we saw in the Popieluszko case, the media are sometimes immensely 
alert to cover-ups. In March 1984, former intelligence officer Santi- 


