although not all aid: U.S. aid to the Khmer Rouge in the 1980s appears 
to have run to many millions. 45 

Applying the principles that we rightly adopt in the case of Soviet 
aggression, the conclusion seems obvious. The United States attacked 
South Vietnam* arguably by 1962 and unquestionably by 1965* expand¬ 
ing its aggression to all of Indochina with lethal and long-term effects. 
Media coverage or other commentary on these events that does not 
begin by recognizing these essential facts is mere apologetics for terror¬ 
ism and murderous aggression. The United States was “defending 
South Vietnam” in the same sense in which the Soviet Union is “de¬ 
fending Afghanistan.” 

But from the point of view of the media* or “the culture,” there is 
no such event in history as the U.S, attack against South Vietnam and 
the rest of Indochina. One would be hard put to find even an single 
reference within the mainstream to any such event* or any recognition 
that history could possibly be viewed from this perspective—just as 
Pravda , presumably* records no such event as the Soviet invasion of 
Afghanistan* only the defense of Afghanistan against “bandits” sup¬ 
ported by the CIA. Even at the peak period of peace-movement activ¬ 
ism there was virtually no opposition to the war within the intellectual 
culture on the grounds that aggression is wrong 46 —the grounds univer¬ 
sally adopted in the case of the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 
1968—for a very simple reason: the fact of U.S. aggression was unrecog¬ 
nized. There was much debate during the war over whether the North 
Vietnamese were guilty of aggression m Vietnam* and as we have seen* 
even the South Vietnamese were condemned for “internal aggression” 
(Adlai Stevenson); but there was no discussion of whether the United 
States was guilty of aggression in its direct attack against South Viet¬ 
nam* then all of Indochina. These intriguing facts reflect the over¬ 
whelming dominance of the state propaganda system and its ability to 
set the terms of thought and discussion* even for those who believe 




THE INDOCHINA WARS (i): VIETNAM I &5 


themselves to be taking an "adversarial stance.” As for the media, 
departures from these doctrinal principles were negligible; indeed, they 
may well have been literally zero in the vast coverage and commentary 
on the war, while it was in progress or since. 

In a revealing article entitled "Lessons of Running Viets* War,” 
published in August 1987, Stanley Karnow, a veteran Asia correspond¬ 
ent and author of a highly regarded liberal history of the Vietnam War, 
argues that the United States erred in Vietnam because it allowed the 
Vietnamese people to depend too heavily on us. 47 Reciprocally, the 
South Vietnamese people also "allowed themselves to be lulled into a 
complacent sense of dependency on the United States,” thinking we 
wouldn't back down, not realizing that small clients are expendable. 
The South Vietnamese people who fought the U.S. invasion are never 
mentioned, or considered to be "South Vietnamese” within Kamow's 
patriotic frame, although they constituted the majority of the popula¬ 
tion and the only serious political force, according to U.S. specialists 
and officials on the scene, and despite the fact that the U.S.-selected 
faction repeatedly stressed that "Frankly, we are not strong enough 
now to compete with the communists on a purely political basis.” 40 A 
Soviet Kamow would no doubt express similar concern in retrospect 
that the Soviet Union allowed the "Afghans” to rely too heavily on 
Soviet power. 

By the standards we rightly apply to the actions of the Soviet Union 
or other official enemies, there is nothing further that need be said 
about the media and Indochina. Any further discussion is on a par with 
the minor question of whether Pravda reports facts accurately about 
“the Soviet defense of Afghanistan.” Adopting the Freedom House— 
Trilateral Commission perspective, a Communist party functionary 
might criticize Pravda for excessive pessimism or for too adversarial a 
stance, contributing to the eventual loss of the war and the takeover of 
Afghanistan by feudalist elements committed to terrorism, horrifying 
repression of women, religious fanaticism, plans to “march on Jerusa¬ 
lem,” etc. Or if he found that the reporting was sufficiently upbeat and 
not too distorted, he might laud Pravda for its accuracy and objectivity. 
But all of this would be nonsense, whatever is discovered; serious 
evaluation of the media is effectively over when we discover that the 
basic principle of state propaganda—the principle that the USSR is 
defending Afghanistan from terrorist attack—is adopted as the unques¬ 
tioned framework for further reporting and discussion. The same is true 
in the case of U.S. aggression in Indochina. 

We cannot quite say that the propaganda model is verified in the case 
of the Indochina wars, since it fails to predict such extraordinary, 



l86 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


far-reaching, and exceptionless subservience to the state propaganda 
system. The fact that this judgment is correct—as it plainly is—is 
startling enough. Even more revealing with regard to Western intellec¬ 
tual culture is that the simple facts cannot be perceived, and their 
import lies far beyond the bounds of the thinkable* 

Nevertheless, let us pursue the narrow question of media coverage 
of Indochina, bearing in mind that we are now turning to relatively 
minor matters, having taken note of a central and quite devastating 
