notably, the State Department Cambodia specialists. Their view, based 
on what evidence was then available (primarily from northwestern 
Cambodia), was that deaths from all causes might have been in the 
“tens if not hundreds of thousands,” largely from disease, malnutrition, 
and “brutal, rapid change,” not “mass genocide.” These tentative con¬ 
clusions were almost entirely ignored by the media—we found one 
important exception in our review—because they were simply not use¬ 
ful for the purpose at the time, just as refugee testimony that did not 
conform to the STV was ignored. Overseas, journalists who had special 



2&4 manufacturing consent 


knowledge of Indochina also gave Tather nuanced accounts, notably, 
Nay an Chanda, 82 

In his detailed, region-by-region study, Vickery shows that the STV 
was a picture with little merit, and that the few skeptics had been 
essentially accurate for the period in question, although in 1977-78, 
something approaching the STV came to be correct in the context of 
brutal inter-party purges and the expanding war with Vietnam, He also 
makes the obvious logical point that “the evidence for 1977-78,” which 
only became available after the Vietnamese conquest in 1979, “does not 
retrospectively justify the STV,” which reigned on the basis of evidence 
from the 1975-76 period; “and the Vietnamese adoption of some of the 
worst Western propaganda stories as support for their case in 1979 does 
not prove that those stories were valid,” 83 Recent work indicates that 
the worst massacres, including those that left the mass graves and 
horrifying heaps of skulls found by journalists who entered Cambodia 
after the Vietnamese conquest, were in the eastern zone bordering 
Vietnam in mid- to late 1978. 84 

The nature of the Western agony over Cambodia during phase II of 
the genocide, as a sociocultural phenomenon, becomes clarified further 
when we compare it to the reaction to comparable and simultaneous 
atrocities in Timor. There, as in phase I of the Cambodia genocide, the 
United States bore primary responsibility and could have acted to 
reduce or terminate the atrocities. In contrast, in Cambodia under DK 
rule, where the blame could be placed on the official enemy, nothing 
at all could be done, a point that was stressed by government experts 
when George McGovern called for international intervention in August 
1978, eliciting much media ridicule, 85 Neither McGovern nor anyone 
else recommended such intervention against the United States during 
phase I of the genocide, or against Indonesia and the United States 
during the Timor atrocities, to which the United States (and, to a much 
lesser extent, other powers) lent material and diplomatic support, just 
as there has been no call for intervention as the armies of El Salvador 
and Guatemala proceeded to slaughter their own populations with 
enthusiastic U,S, support in the early 1980s. 

The comparison between Timor and phase II in Cambodia was 
particularly striking, and was occasionally noted after the fact. The 
excuses now produced for this refusal to report what was happening in 
Timor, or to protest these atrocities or act to stop them, are instructive 
in the present context. Thus, William Shawcross rejects the obvious 
interpretation of the comparative response to Timor and Cambodia in 
favor of a “more structurally serious explanation”: “a comparative lack 
of sources” and lack of access to refugees. 86 Lisbon is a two-hour flight 


THE INDOCHINA WARS (II): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 285 


from London, and even Australia is not notably harder to reach than 
the Thai-Cambodia border, but the many Timorese refugees in Lisbon 
and Australia were ignored by the media, which preferred “facts” 
offered by the State Department and Indonesian generals. Similarly, 
the media ignored readily available refugee studies from sources at least 
as credible as those used as the basis for the ideologically serviceable 
outrage over the Khmer Rouge, and disregarded highly credible wit¬ 
nesses who reached New York and Washington along with additional 
evidence from church sources and others. The coverage of Timor 
actually declined sharply as massacres increased with mounting U.S. 
support. The real and “structurally serious” reason for this difference 
in scope and character of coverage is not difficult to discern (see chapter 
1), although not very comfortable for Western opinion, and becomes 
still more obvious when a broader range of cases is considered that 
illustrate the same conclusions. 87 


6.2.7. Phase III in Indochina: 
Cambodia and the bleeding of 
Vietnam 

As we write in 1987, Western moralists remain silent as their govern¬ 
ments provide the means for Indonesia to continue its campaign of 
terror and repression in Timor. Meanwhile* the United States backs the 
DK coalition, largely based on the Khmer Rouge, because of its “conti¬ 
nuity” with the Pol Pot regime, so the State Department informed 
Congress in 1982. The reason for this differential reaction to the Fretilin 
guerrillas resisting Indonesian aggression in Timor, and the Khmer 
Rouge guerrillas attacking Cambodia from Thai bases, is also explained 
by the State Department: the Khmer Rouge-based coalition is 
“unquestionably” more representative of the people of Cambodia than 
Fretilin is of the Timorese. 00 There is, therefore, no need to puzzle over 
the apparent inconsistency during the late 1970s in U.S. attitudes to¬ 
ward Pol Pot and the Indonesian generals: the former, the object of 
hatred and contempt for the massacres in Cambodia under his rule 
