newsworthy. These bureaucracies turn out a large volume of material 
that meets the demands of news organizations for reliable* scheduled 
flows. Mart Fishman calls rhis “the principle of bureaucratic affinity; 
only other bureaucracies can satisfy the input needs of a news bureauc¬ 
racy,” 62 

Government and corporate sources also have the great merit of being 
recognizable and credible by their status and prestige. This is important 
to the mass media. As Fishman notes, 

Newsworkers are predisposed to treat bureaucratic accounts as 
factual because news personnel participate in upholding a norma¬ 
tive order of authorized knowers in the society. Reporters operate 
with the attitude that officials ought to know what it is their job 
to know,,,. In particular, a newsworker will recognize an officials 
claim to knowledge not merely as a claim* but as a credible, 
competent piece of knowledge. This amounts to a moral division 
of labor; officials have and give the facts; reporters merely get 
them, 63 

Another reason for the heavy weight given to official sources is that the 
mass media claim to be “objective” dispensers of the news. Partly to 
maintain the image of objectivity, but also to protect themselves from 
criticisms of bias and the threat of libel suits* they need material that 
can be portrayed as presumptively accurate. 64 This is also partly a 
matter of cost; taking information from sources that may be presumed 
credible reduces investigative expense, whereas material from sources 
that are not prima facie credible, or that will elicit criticism and threats, 
requires careful checking and costly research. 

The magnitude of the public-information operations of large govern¬ 
ment and corporate bureaucracies that constitute the primary news 
sources is vast and ensures special access to the media. The Pentagon, 
for example, has a public-information service that involves many thou¬ 
sands of employees, spending hundreds of millions of dollars every year 
and dwarfing not only the public-information resources of any dissent¬ 
ing individual or group but the aggregate of such groups. In 1979 and 
1980* during a brief interlude of relative openness (since closed down). 



20 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


the U.S. Air Force revealed that its public-information outreach in¬ 
cluded the following: 

140 newspapers, 690,000 copies per week 

Airman magazine, monthly circulation 125,000 

34 radio and 17 TV stations, primarily overseas 

45,000 headquarters and unit news releases 

615,000 hometown news releases 

6,600 interviews with news media 

3,200 news conferences 

500 news media orientation flights 

50 meetings with editorial boards 

11,000 speeches 65 

This excludes vast areas of the air force’s public-information effort. 
Writing back in 1970, Senator J. W. Fulbright had found that the air 
force public-relations effort in 1968 involved 1,305 full-time employees, 
exclusive of additional thousands that “have public functions collateral 
to other duties.” 66 The air force at that time offered a weekly film-clip 
service for TV and a taped features program for use three times a week, 
sent to 1,139 radio stations; it also produced 148 motion pictures, of 
which 24 were released for public consumption. 67 There is no reason 
to believe that the air force public-relations effort has diminished since 
the 1960s. 68 

Note that this is just the air force. There are three other branches with 
massive programs, and there is a separate, overall public-information 
program under an assistant secretary of defense for public affairs in the 
Pentagon. In 1971, an Armed Forces Journal survey revealed that the 
Pentagon was publishing a total of 371 magazines at an annual cost of 
some $57 million, an operation sixteen times larger than the nation’s 
biggest publisher. In an update in 1982, the Air Force Journal Interna¬ 
tional indicated that the Pentagon was publishing 1,203 periodicals. 69 
To put this into perspective, we may note the scope of public-informa¬ 
tion operations of the American Friends Service Committee (AFSC) 
and the National Council of the Churches of Christ (NCC), two of the 
largest of the nonprofit organizations that offer a consistently challeng¬ 
ing voice to the views of the Pentagon. The AFSC’s main office infor¬ 
mation-services budget in 1984-85 was under $500,000, with eleven 
staff people. 70 Its institution-wide press releases run at about two hun¬ 
dred per year, its press conferences thirty a year, and it produces about 
one him and two or three slide shows a year. It does not offer film dips. 



A PROPAGANDA MODEL 21 

