in the Pol Pot era (and thereafter) was exceedingly serviceable, as 
Cambodia had fallen to the Communists and useful lessons could be 
drawn by attention to their victims, the numerous victims of the U.S, 
bombing before the Communist takeover were scrupulously ignored by 
the U.S. elite press. After Pol Pot’s ouster by the Vietnamese, the 
United States quietly shifted support to this “worse than Hitler” villain, 
with little notice in the press, which adjusted once again to the national 
political agenda, 124 Attention to the Indonesian massacres of 1965-66, 
or the victims of the Indonesian invasion of East Timor from 1975 
onward, would also be distinctly unhelpful as bases of media cam¬ 
paigns, because Indonesia is a U.S. ally and client that maintains an 
open door to Western investment, and because, in the case of East 
Timor, the United States bears major responsibility for the slaughter. 
The same is true of the victims of stare terror in Chile and Guatemala, 
U.S. clients whose basic institutional structures, including the state 
terror system, were put in place and maintained by, or with crucial 
assistance from, U,S. power, and who remain U.S. client states. Propa¬ 
ganda campaigns on behalf of these victims would conflict with govern¬ 
ment-business-military interests and, in our model, would not be able 
to pass through the filtering system. 125 

Propaganda campaigns may be instituted either by the government 
or by one or more of the top media firms. The campaigns to discredit 
the government of Nicaragua, to support the Salvadoran elections as 
an exercise in legitimizing democracy, and to use the Soviet shooting 
down of the Korean airliner KAL 007 as a means of mobilizing public 
support for the arms buildup, were instituted and propelled by the 
government. The campaigns to publicize the crimes of Pol Pot and the 
alleged KGB plot to assassinate the pope were initiated by the Reader’s 
Digest, with strong follow-up support from NBC-TV, the New York 
Times, and other major media companies, 126 Some propaganda cam¬ 
paigns are jointly initiated by government and media; all of them re¬ 
quire the collaboration of the mass media. The secret of the 
unidirectionality of the politics of media propaganda campaigns is the 
multiple filter system discussed above: the mass media will allow any 
stories that are hurtful to large interests to peter out quickly, if they 
surface at all. 127 



34 manufacturing consent 


For stories that are useful^ the process will get under way with a series 
of government leaks, press conferences, white papers, etc., or with one 
or more of the mass media starting the ball rolling with such articles 
as Barron and Paul’s “Murder of a Gentle Land” (Cambodia), or Claire 
Sterling’s “The Plot to Kill the Pope,” both in the Reader** Digest . If 
the other major media like the story, they will follow it up with their 
own versions, and the matter quickly becomes newsworthy by familiar¬ 
ity. If the articles are written in an assured and convincing style, are 
subject to no criticisms or alternative interpretations in the mass media, 
and command support by authority figures, the propaganda themes 
quickly become established as true even without real evidence. This 
tends to close out dissenting views even more comprehensively, as they 
would now conflict with an already established popular belief. This in 
turn opens up further opportunities for still more inflated claims, as 
these can be made without fear of serious repercussions. Similar wild 
assertions made in contradiction of official views would elicit powerful 
flak, so that such an inflation process would be controlled by the gov¬ 
ernment and the market. No such protections exist with system-sup¬ 
portive claims; there, flak will tend to press the media to greater hysteria 
in the face of enemy evil. The media not only suspend critical judgment 
and investigative zeal, they compete to find ways of putting the newly 
established truth in a supportive light. Themes and facts—even careful 
and well-documented analyses—that are incompatible with the now 
institutionalized theme are suppressed or ignored. If the theme col* 
lapses of its own burden of fabrications, the mass media will quietly fold 
their tents and move on to another topic. 128 

Using a propaganda model, we would not only anticipate definitions 
of worth based on utility, and dichotomous attention based on the same 
criterion, we would also expect the news stories about worthy and 
unworthy victims (or enemy and friendly states) to differ in quality . 
That is, we would expect official sources of the United States and its 
client regimes to be used heavily—and uncritically—in connection with 
one’s own abuses and those of friendly governments, while refugees and 
other dissident sources will be used in dealing with enemies, 129 We 
would anticipate the uncritical acceptance of certain premises in deal¬ 
ing with self and friends—such as that one’s own state and leaders seek 
peace and democracy, oppose terrorism, and tell the truth—premises 
which will not be applied in treating enemy states. We would expect 
different criteria of evaluation to be employed, so that what is villainy 
in enemy states will be presented as an incidental background fact in 
the case of oneself and friends. 130 What is on the agenda in treating one 
case will be off the agenda in discussing the other. 131 We would also 




A PROPAGANDA MODEL 35 


expect great investigatory zeal in the search for enemy villainy and the 
responsibility of high officials for abuses in enemy states, but dimin¬ 
ished enterprise in examining such matters in connection with one’s 
own and friendly states. 

The quality of coverage should also be displayed more directly and 
crudely in placement, headlining, word usage, and other modes of 
