porate establishment* caused their devotion to the First Amendment to 
flag in a way it never has when their own rights and privileges have been 
at stake. 

As is suggested by the media’s treatment of NAFTA and of labor’s 
right to participate in its debates, as well as the media coverage of Water¬ 
gate* COINTELPRO, and major events in the earlier history of labor- 
management conflict (the Haymarket affair, the Homestead strike, the 
post-World War I “red scare”}* 121 the propaganda model applies to do- 



introduction xlv 


mestic as well as foreign policy issues. Labor has been under renewed 
siege in the United States for the past several decades, its condition 
adversely affected by the deflationary policies of the early 1980s, corpo¬ 
rate downsizings globalization, a vigorous business campaign to defeat 
unions, and government support of, or indifference to, the damage being 
inflicted on unions and workers. There was a major drop in union mem¬ 
bership from the beginning of the Reagan era, with union density falling 
from 25 percent in 1980 to 14,5 percent in 1996 (and only 10.2 percent in 
the private sector). This reflected weakened labor bargaining power and 
was accompanied by significant concessions in wages and benefits, more 
onerous working conditions, and greater worker insecurity. 

President Reagan's firing of 11,000 striking air-controllers in 1981 
“put the government seal of approval on strike-breaking and a new era of 
industrial relations opened” 122 But you would hardly know this from 
reading or listening to the mainstream media. An exceptional 1994 Busi¬ 
ness Week article noted that “over the past dozen years . . . U.S. industry 
has conducted one of the most successful union wars ever,” helped by 
“illegally firing thousands of workers for exercising their right to organ¬ 
ize,” with unlawful firings occurring in “one-third of all representation 
elections in the late ’Sos” 123 But this successful war was carried out 
quietly, with media cooperation. The decertification of unions, use of 
replacement workers, and long, debilitating strikes like that involving 
Caterpillar were treated in a very low key manner. In a notable illustra¬ 
tion of the applicability of the propaganda model, the nine-month-long 
Pittston miners' strike that began in April 1989 was accorded much less 
attention, and less friendly treatment, than the Soviet miners' strikes of 
the summer of that same year, 124 

From 1977 through 1999, while the incomes of the top 1 percent of 
households grew by 84.8 percent and the top 10 percent by 44.6 percent, 
the bottom 60 percent lost ground and the income of the lowest 20 
percent fell by 12.5 percent. 125 Real hourly earnings of production and 
nonsupervisory employees (i.e., the So percent of the workforce that 
holds working-class jobs) fell by 4.8 percent between 1973 and 1999 . 126 
