Much 

The “key question” for Tagliabue is “how Agca knew what he knew and when 
he knew it.” This is an important issue, but there are others that he might have 


raised if he had worked outside the SHK format. Why did it take Agca so long 
to name Bulgarians? Was he subject to any coercion or offered any positive 
inducements to make him talk. Why did he have to make major retractions? 
Is it not suspicious that when Agca finally talked, he said just what his inter¬ 
rogators wanted him to say? How are we to evaluate a judicial process where 
the witness (Agca) was in regular contact with outside sources of information 
and where he could lie and retract evidence without penalty? 


“Even the Attorneys for the 
Bulgarians...,” 

In assessing how Agca knew so much, Tagliabue allocates only one paragraph 
to the possibility that Agca was coached. On the other hand, he goes to great 
pains to stress that Agca knew an awful lot—telephone numbers, personal 
habits, nicknames. Tagliabue gives as the “simplest explanation” of Agca’s 
knowledge that he had access to books, newspapers, magazines, and other 
materials from the outside. Interestingly, he fails to mention the numerous 
prison contacts between Agca and secret service, Mafia, and Vatican agents 
and emissaries. Agca even wrote a letter to the Vatican complaining of the 
pressure from its representative in prison (also linked to the Mafia), a fact long 
blacked out by the Times. These visits would point to the ease with which Agca 
could have been fed information while in prison. Tagliabue will not admit facts 
that get into this dangerous territory. 

A major question is how Agca knew details about Antonov’s apartment when 
he later admitted to Martella that he had never been there . The Bulgarians and 
Antonov’s defense went to great pains to prove that the information Agca 
provided about Antonov’s apartment had never been divulged in the media 
before Agca enumerated the details. This implied coaching, as did a mistake 
in identification where Agca described a characteristic of Antonov’s apartment 
that fitted other apartments in the building, but not Antonov’s. Tagliabue says 
that “Even the attorneys for the Bulgarians acknowledge” that Agca named 
things not available through reading the papers, as if they were conceding a 
point, not making a devastating case for coaching. Newspaper work couldn’t 
be more dishonest than this. 




reports, had mentioned Mafia official Giovanni Pandico’s statement in Italy 
outlining a scenario of coaching at which he claimed to be present, but Taglia¬ 
bue doesn’t even cite this or any other documents or facts that lend support 
to the coaching hypothesis. He sticks to the ingredients that fit the SHK 
