

xxx JV introduction 


over the past decade, we see that the media have mainly repeated and 
elaborated several apologetic themes already entrenched by the end of 
the war. 

One theme has been that the U.S. intervention was justified by the fact 
of “communism on the march’ 1 (editorial, Washington Post, April 30, 
2000), It was argued from the beginning that the Communist advance in 
Vietnam was part of a global communist conspiracy, a position main¬ 
tained in the face of the split and hostility between China and the Soviet 
Union, tension between China and North Vietnam, and the absence of 
any evidence that North Vietnam was anybody's tool. In his book In Ret¬ 
rospect / 7 former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara admits that he 
and his colleagues made a serious error on this point. But neither he nor 
the other establishment figures who have used this argument have ever 
questioned the U.S, right to intervene by force to stop the “march of 
communism" in a country where the Communists had Jed a nationalist 
revolution, were recognized by all official and nonofficia] authorities to 
command the support of a Large majority of the population, and where 
their defeat would require open aggression, mass killing, and the virtual 
destruction of a distant society. 

Closely related was the theme that we were protecting “South Viet¬ 
nam" and the “South Vietnamese," who “let the Americans take over the 
fighting” (editorial, Washington Post , April 30, T995). A subtheme of this 
line is that we “let down" the South Vietnamese. But as noted earlier. 
South Vietnam as a political entity was a U.S. concoction and the U.S, 
war managers recognized that most of the southern population sup¬ 
ported the side the United States was fighting. This explains why the 
main thrust of U.S. violence was directed to the South, where napalm, 
B-52 bombing raids, chemical warfare, the institutionalized killing of 
civilians, and a scorched-earth policy were used to destroy the base of 
the popular movement. 73 We also noted earlier that this ferocious U.S, 
assault on the South—which contradicted the claim that we were pro¬ 
tecting South Vietnamese—-remains invisible in the U.S. media. 

Another important theme in the mainstream media for many years has 
been the notion that The United States was the victim in the Vietnam war, 
the Vietnamese the cruel villains. This remarkable inversion of reality has 
been accomplished by two processes: first, by a massive suppression of 
evidence on the consequences of the war for the Vietnamese; and second, 
by demonizing the victims, based in large measure on “the national beat¬ 
ification of POWs [prisoners of war] and the myth of POWs as martyrs 
still being tortured by Vietnam."™ 

The only Vietnamese allowed modest attention in the media have been 
