higher rates of killing are no longer deemed beneficial). The poor, for 
whom he expressed so much compassion during the electoral campaign, 
have suffered further losses in real income, as Cerezo’s “reforms” have 
accommodated the demands of the army and oligarchy. He is on very 
poor terms with the Mutual Support Group, Thus, the postelection 
pattern shows that Cerezo, in pan by prior agreement but more deci¬ 
sively by structural constraints, has been entirely unable to serve his 
mass constituency. In the 1984-85 election, Cerezo gave the Guatema¬ 
lan people an opportunity to vote for a man of seeming goodwill and 
good intentions, but one unable to respond to democratic demands 
opposed by the real rulers of the state. 

In Nicaragua, in 1984, the spectrum of candidates was much wider 
than in El Salvador, Guatemala, or, for that matter, the United States. 52 
The Conservative Democratic party and the Independent Liberal party 
both issued strong calls for respect for private property, reduced gov¬ 
ernment control of the economy, elimination of press and other con¬ 
trols, and a foreign policy of greater nonalignment and accommodation. 
Both were able to denounce the Sandinistas for the war and to call for 
depoliticization of the army and negotiations with the contras. Arturo 
Cruz, after lengthy negotiations with representatives of the govern¬ 
ment, chose not to run in the 1984 election. But this was a voluntary 
act of Cruz (albeit under heavy U.S. pressure), 53 in contrast with the 
position of the left in El Salvador and Guatemala, and was not based 
on physical threats to his person or limits on his access to the popu¬ 
lace. 54 

The FSLN had a strong advantage over the opposition parties as the 
party in power, defending the country from foreign attack and having 
mobilized the population for their own projects of development. The 
LAS A group felt that much of the incumbency advantage of the FSLN 
was characteristic of governments everywhere, and concluded: 

It seems clear that the FSLN took substantial advantage of its 
incumbent position and, in some ways, abused it. However, the 
abuses of incumbency do not appear to have been systematic; and 
neither the nature of the abuses nor their frequency was such as 
to cripple the opposition parties* campaigns or to cast doubt on 



legitimizing versus meaningless third world elections 105 


the fundamental validity of the electoral process. . . . Generally 
speaking* in this campaign the FSLK did little more to take ad¬ 
vantage of its incumbency than incumbent parties everywhere 
(including the United States) routinely do* and considerably less 
than ruling parties in other Larin American countries traditionally 
have done. 55 

We would conclude that the ability of candidates to qualify and run* 
and the range of options* was substantially greater in Nicaragua than 
in El Salvador and Guatemala. Furthermore, as all major political 
groups of the left were off the ballot by threat of violence in the latter 
two cases, those elections fail to meet still another basic electoral condi¬ 
tion. 


3*2.5* Absence of state terror and 
a climate of fear 

During the years 1980-84 the death squads worked freely in El Salva¬ 
dor, in close coordination with the army and security forces. The 
average rate of killings of civilians in the thirty months prior to the 1982 
election was approximately seven hundred per month. Many of these 
victims were raped* tortured* and mutilated. AH of this was done with 
complete impunity* and only the murder of four American women 
elicited—by dint of congressional pressure—any kind of legal action. 
Even William Doherty of the American Institute for Free Labor Devel¬ 
opment—a longtime supporter of U.S. policy in El Salvador—asserted 
before a congressional committee that there was no system of justice 
operative in that country, while Leonel Gomex, a former land-reform 
official in El Salvador, told the same committee a bit later that state 
terror had put the population in a state of “fearful passivity.” 56 

In Guatemala* too, the endemic fear based on years of unconstrained 
and continuing army violence was a dominant fact of national life. 
According to Americas Watch* writing in early 1985* 

Torture* killings* and disappearances continue at an extraordinary 
rate* and millions of peasants remain under the strict scrutiny and 
control of the government through the use of civil patrols and 
“model villages.” Guatemala remains, in short, a nation of prison¬ 
ers. 57 



106 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


The law group described Guatemala in 1985 as “a country where the 
greater part of the people live in permanent fear.” 58 

In the case of Nicaragua* we repeat the central fact that differentiates 
it from the U.S. client states: in 1984 its government was not murdering 
civilians. 5 * The main fear of ordinary citizens in Nicaragua was of 
violence by the contras and the United States, 

Our conclusion is that the fifth condition for a free election was met 
