was unassailable; and the crimes they suffered were more savage than 
those undergone by Popieluszko. Most important of all, these were 
crimes for which we bear considerable responsibility, since they were 
perpetrated by clients who depend on our support, so that exposure and 
pressure could have a significant effect in safeguarding human rights. 
On the other hand, the Reagan administration was busily trying to enter 
into warmer and more supportive relations with the Guatemalan mili¬ 
tary regime and, as we described earlier, was going to great pains to put 
the regime in a favorable light. A propaganda model would anticipate 
that even these dramatic and horrifying murders would be treated in 
a low-key manner and quickly dropped by the mass media—that, unlike 
Popieluszko, there would be no sustained interest, no indignation capa¬ 
ble of rousing the public (and disturbing the administration’s plans). 
These expectations are fully vindicated by the record. 

Table 2-3 compares media coverage of the Popieluszko case with that 
of the murders of the GAM leaders. It is immediately obvious that the 
treatment is radically different in the two cases. The GAM murders 
couldn’t even make “the news” at Time, Newsweek, or CBS News, The 
New York Times never found these murders worthy of the front page 
or editorial comment, and we can see that the intensity of its coverage 
was slight. The first report of the quadruple murder was on April 7, 
1985, in a tiny item on page 5 of the paper in which it is mentioned that 
the body of Maria Rosario Godoy de Cuevas was found in her car in 
a ravine, along with the bodies of her brother and her young son. In 
neither this item nor any succeeding article does the Times provide 
details on the condition of the bodies, or mention that the two-year-old 
child had his fingernails tom out. 109 

In other respects, too, the Times articles, all written by Stephen 
Kinzer, generally employ an apologetic framework. That is, they don’t 
focus on the murders—who the victims were, the details of the vio¬ 
lence, who did it, why, and the institutional structures and roots of 
organized murder of which these are an obvious part. With Popie¬ 
luszko, these were the issues. Kinzer has little or nothing on the details 
of the GAM murders and very little on the victims and the experiences 
that brought them to GAM, and the question of who did it and what 
was being done (or not done) to bring the murderers to justice he hardly 
considers. Kinzer takes it for granted that the murders were committed 
by agents of the state, but he doesn’t say this explicitly, or discuss the 



I'll* media f-overAge is for an IS-month period from the time of the firm report of the victim^ disappearance or murder. 



H 

> 

n 

r 1 

w 

N 

I 

W 


*8 


WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS 85 


background, or provide a framework for evaluating the case. He looks 
“objectively” at the scene, quoting some of the GAM survivors in brief 
and rhetorical statements that are offset by quotes from the generals: 
they approved the formation of GAM (an ambiguous half-truth); they 
appointed an investigating committee that “found no evidence of secret 
detention centers in Guatemala” (no mention of the composition of the 
committee, no counter-evidence, and no mention of issues they may 
have overlooked—like disappeared who are murdered); and they deny 
any responsibility for the murder of Godoy, her brother, and her son, 
who they claim to have been victims of an auto accident. If Kinzer had 
given the details of the victims' injuries, this lie would have been 
exposed as such, and further questions would have suggested them¬ 
selves. 

In article after article, Kinzer repeats that the Mejia Victores gov¬ 
ernment has pledged to return to civilian rule shortly, which helps 
deflect attention from the ongoing killing and its causes, and from the 
GAM murders under discussion; he also does not tell us just what 
“civilian rule” would mean in a terrorist state in which, as he knows, 
the effective rulers would be the same military forces, 110 In the Popie- 
luszko case, once it was established that the police had committed the 
murder, the media spent a great deal of space discussing the police 
apparatus and police methods, as well as attending to the responsibility 
of the people at higher levels for the murder. Kinzer doesn't discuss 
these questions at all. The structure of the Guatemalan murder ma¬ 
chine and how it works would make a good story, and numerous details 
of its operations were available, but this did not fit the government 
agenda and the Times format. Similarly, the role of Mejia Victores in 
the murder of the GAM leaders—recall his warnings just prior to the 
murders, and consider his virtually unlimited discretionary power to 
