of intent and the inspiring benevolence of the elites who determine U.S* 
policy. It was necessary to overcome what Norman Podhoretz, echoing 
Goebbels, calls “the sickly inhibitions against the use of military force,” 



THE rNDOCHfNA WARS (r): VTETftAM 237 


the dread “Vietnam syndrome*” finally cured by the stirring triumph 
of U,S. arms in Grenada* so Podhoretz hoped, 1,2 This was part of a 
larger problem, the “crisis of democracy” perceived by Western elites 
as the normally passive general population threatened to participate in 
the political system, challenging established privilege and power, 153 A 
further task was to prevent recovery in the societies ravaged by the 
American assault, so that the partial victory already achieved by their 
destruction could be sustained. 

As we have seen, through the mid-sixties* the media loyally fulfilled 
their function of service to state violence, and there was no significant 
popular opposition to the U.S. attack on Indochina. True, in 1964* the 
population voted 2 to 1 in favor of the “peace candidate,” who was 
assuring them that we want no wider war while laying the groundwork 
for the rapid escalation planned for the postelection period* a note¬ 
worthy illustration of the character of electoral politics in a society 
lacking genuine opposition parties and a critical and independent press. 
Nevertheless* the enthusiasm of the ideological institutions for the 
rapid escalation of U.S, efforts to “defend South Vietnam” from “inter¬ 
nal aggression” helped keep the public in line as the U.S. invading army 
rose to over half-a-million men on the ground and appeared to be 
attaining some success in “grinding the enemy down by sheer weight 
and mass*” although at “horrendous cost,” in the words of pacification 
chief Robert (“Blowtorch”) Komer, later to become a high-ranking 
official of the Human Rights Administration. 154 

By 1967, the popular mood was shifting, and the public was begin¬ 
ning to defy the hawk-dove consensus of elites for whom the issues 
were limited to tactics and expedience, a matter of much government 
concern. Defense Secretary McNamara warned the president* in secret, 
in May 1967 that expansion of the American war might “polarize opin¬ 
ion to the extent that *doves J in the US will get out of hand—massive 
refusals to serve, or to fight, or to cooperate* or worse?” 155 At the time 
of the Tet offensive, the Joint Chiefs of Staff were concerned with “our 
capacity to meet the possibility of widespread civil disorder in the 
months ahead”; in considering further troop deployments, they took 
care to ensure that “sufficient forces are still available for civil disorder 
control*” including “National Guard forces deployed under State or 
Federal control” and U.S. Army troops. The Pentagon warned further 
that a request for more troops might lead to “increased defiance of the 
draft and growing unrest in the cities,” running the risk of “provoking 
