44. The guerrilla position was that with the army having set up a national 
control system, military domination had been institutionalized and elections 
would have no meaning. See “Guerrillas’ View of Elections: Army Will Hold 
Power Despite Polls,” Latin America Weekly Report, October 25, 1985, p. n. 

45. HRC, Report, p. 7. 

46. Americas Watch, Civil Patrols in Guatemala (New York: AW, 1986), p. 2. 

47. “El Sefior Presidente?” An interview of Cerezo by George Black in Octo¬ 
ber 1985, NACLA Report on the Americas (November-December 1985), p. 24. 

48. “In a meeting several months ago with the ultra-rightist organization 
Amigos del Pais, which allegedly has strong death squad connections, PDCG 
deputies to the Constituent Assembly pledged that if the party came to power, 
they would refrain from agrarian and banking reforms, investigation into 
human rights abuses by the armed forces, and any interference in the coun¬ 
terinsurgency program” (“Guatemala Votes,” Washington Report on the Hemi¬ 
sphere, Nov. 27, 1985). Stephen Kinzer also reports on a private meeting 
between Cerezo and right-wing landowners, in which “he said we all needed 
each other at this moment...” (“When a Landslide Is Not a Mandate,” New 
York Times, Dec. 15, 1985). 

49. Allen Nairn and Jean-Marie Simon, in their “The Bureaucracy of Death,” 
New Republic, (June 30,1986), describe the “tactical alliance” between Cerezo 
and the army, which protected them against any accountability for past ac¬ 
tions, in exchange for which the army would allow Cerezo to occupy office. 

50. See “Cerezo Adapts to Counterinsurgency,” Guatemala, Guatemala News 
and Information Bureau (May-June 1986). 

51. American Watch, Human Rights in Guatemala during President Cerezo’s 
First Year, February 1987. Cerezo argued for not prosecuting the military for 
old crimes on the ground that everyone wanted to start afresh. But Americas 
Watch points out that if terrible crimes of the past are exempt from the rule 
of law, it suggests that Cerezo doesn’t have the power to stop further military 
crimes. “It is a sign that the rule of law has not been established in Guatemala, 
and that it cannot be established” (p. 4). This point is supported by Cerezo’s 
inaction in the face of a hundred violent deaths a month—many of them 
political murders by the army—after he assumed office. 

52. See Michael Parenti, “Is Nicaragua More Democratic Than the United 



States?” Covert Action Information Bulletin 26 (Summer 1986), pp. 48-52. 

53. Wayne S. Smith, “Lies About Nicaragua,” Foreign Policy (Summer 1987), 
p. 93. Smith states that Cruz “now says that he regrets not taking part and that 
his failure to participate in the 1984 elections was one of his major political 
