are even more ubiquitous,” including the provincial capital, “com¬ 
pletely razed,” as had been reported earlier by refugees who were 
ignored. Following the practice of American volunteers during the war, 
American relief workers with long experience in Laos attempted to 
bring information about postwar Laos to the media—with little effect— 
and inform us privately that their accounts were seriously distorted by 
New York Times reporters “by the device of omission and taking the 
negative side of balanced statements we made 5 * and similar means. 15 

The ILS, government officially denied all of this, continuing the 
deception even after the facts were exposed and known in some detail 
to those concerned enough to learn them. Many regarded the U.S. war 
in Laos as “a success” (Senators Jacob Javits and Stuart Symington), 
or even “A spectacular success ” (a former CIA officer in Laos, Thomas 
McCoy). 16 

In scale and care, the extensive analysis of refugee reports by a few 
young American volunteers in Laos compares very favorably to the 
subsequent studies of refugees from Cambodia that received massive 
publicity in the West after the Khmer Rouge takeover, and the story 
was both gruesome and highly pertinent to ongoing U.S. operations. 
But there was little interest, and published materials, which appeared 
primarily outside of the mainstream, were virtually ignored and quickly 
forgotten; the agency of terror was inappropriate for the needs of the 
doctrinal system. Media failure to report the facts when they were 
readily available, in 1968, and to investigate further when they were 
undeniable, by late 1969, contributed to the successful deception of the 
public, and to the continuing destruction. 

When the war ended, ABC News commentator Harry Reasoner 
expressed his hope that Laos and its “gentle folk” could return to 
peaceful ways after “the clowning of the CIA and the vicious invasion 
of the North Vietnamese. 5117 The “clowning of the CIA” included the 
destruction of “the rebel economy and social fabric 51 in northern Laos, 
with unknown numbers killed in areas that may never recover, and the 
decimation of the Hmong who were enlisted in the CIA cause and then 
abandoned when no longer useful. Nothing remotely comparable may 
be attributed to “the vicious invasion of the North Vietnamese”— 
which did, however, include such atrocities as killing twelve U.S, Air 
Force men in March 1968 at a U.S. radar base near the North Viet¬ 
namese border used to direct the bombing of North Vietnam and 
operations in North Vietnam by U.S.-led mercenaries. 10 



260 MANUFACTURING consent 


The New York Times reviewed the war in Laos at the war's end, 
concluding that 350,000 people had been killed, over a tenth of the 
