ately terminated* Sources close to the U*S, government predicted a 
million deaths in Cambodia if U,S_ aid were to cease* A Western doctor 
working in Phnom Penh in 1974-75 reported that 

This generation is going to be a lost generation of children* Mal¬ 
nutrition is going to affect their numbers and their mental capaci¬ 
ties* So, as well as knocking off a generation of young men, the war 
is knocking off a generation of children. 

The U,S. embassy estimated that available rice in Phnom Penh would 
suffice for at most a few weeks. The final U.S. AID report observed that 
the country faced famine in 1975, with 75 percent of its draft animals 
destroyed by the war, and that rice planting for the next harvest, eight 
months hence, would have to be done “by the hard labor of seriously 
malnourished people.” The report predicted “widespread starvation” 
and “Slave labor and starvation rations for half the nation's people” for 
the coming year, and “general deprivation and suffering . . . over the 
next two or three years before Cambodia can get back to rice self- 
sufficiency*” 33 

There is also the matter of the effect of the U.S, bombing on the 
Khmer Rouge and the peasant society that provided their social base, 
a factor noted by all serious analysts, Cambodia specialist Milton Os¬ 
borne concludes that Communist terror was “surely a reaction to the 
terrible bombing of Communist-held regions” by the U.S* Air Force, 
Another Cambodia scholar, David Chandler, comments that the bomb¬ 
ing turned “thousands of young Cambodians into participants in an 
anti-American crusade,” as it “destroyed a good deal of the fabric of 
prewar Cambodian society and provided the CPK [Khmer Rouge] with 
the psychological ingredients of a violent, vengeful, and unrelenting 
social revolution,” a “class warfare between the "base people,' who had 
been bombed, and the ‘new people' who had taken refuge from the 
bombing and thus had taken sides, in CPK thinking, with the United 
States*” “French intransigence had turned nationalists into Commu¬ 
nists,” Philip Windsor observes, while “American ruthlessness now 
turned Communists into totalitarian fanatics*” 34 One may debate the 
weight that should be assigned to this factor in determining Khmer 
Rouge policies, embittering the peasant society of “base people,” and 
impelling them to force those they perceived as collaborators in their 
destruction to endure the lives of poor peasants or worse. But that it 
was a factor can hardly be doubted- 

Assessing these various elements, it seems fair to describe the re- 






THE INDOCHINA WARS ( 11 ): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 265 


sponsibility of the United States and Pol Pot for atrocities during “the 
decade of the genocide” as being roughly in the same range. 

Little is known about phase I of “the genocide.” There was little 
interest in ascertaining the facts, at the time or since. The Finnish 
Inquiry Commission Report devotes three cursory pages to the topic, 
because the information available is so meager. The second phase has 
been far more intensively studied, and by now substantial evidence is 
available about what took place. David Chandler and Ben Kieman 
observe that as a result of the intense interest in phase II, “we know 
a great deal more about the texture of daily life in Democratic Kampu¬ 
chea, supposedly a ‘hermit’ regime, than we do about the ostensibly 
open regimes of the Khmer Republic (1970-1975) or the Sihanouk era 
(1954-1970) which preceded it.” 35 Despite this already large imbalance 
in knowledge, the Cambodia Documentation Center in New York City 
concentrates on phase II of the genocide. The dramatic difference in 
the information available for the two phases, and the focus of the 
ongoing research effort, are readily explicable in terms of a propaganda 
model. 

Outside of marginal Maoist circles, there was virtually no doubt from 
early on that the Khmer Rouge regime under the emerging leader Pol 
Pot was responsible for gruesome atrocities. But there were differing 
assessments of the scale and character of these crimes. 

State Department Cambodia specialists were skeptical of the allega¬ 
tions that had received wide publicity by 1977—rightly, so subsequent 
inquiry revealed. The Far Eastern Economic Review based its January 
1979 conclusion that the population had actually risen during the Pol 
Pot period on CIA sources, and its very knowledgeable correspondent 
Nay an Chanda, discussing the background for the Vietnamese inva¬ 
sion, reported that “some observers are convinced that had the Cambo¬ 
dian regime got a year’s reprieve, its internal and international image 
would have been improved enough to make any Vietnamese drive 
difficult if not impossible.” 36 

Differing assessments persisted even after the abundant evidence 
provided by the flow of refugees to Thailand in 1979 and visits to 
Cambodia, which also provided the first significant information about 
the years 1977-78. At one extreme, Pol Pot continued to be described 
as having forged new patterns of genocide comparable to the worst 
excesses of Hitler and Stalin. At the other extreme, we have the postwar 
evaluation by U.S. government specialist Douglas Pike, now head of the 
University of California Indochina Archives, the “independent- 
minded” scholar lauded by Freedom House and the exemplar of the 



