rately. The second example is a CBS radio report criticized only for being 


“depressed”—as were pacification officials on the ground. The third example 
is from an NBC-TV “special,” in which Dean Brelis says that we don’t know 
what is happening in the rural areas but “can only imagine,” and that “the 
cities are no longer secure; perhaps they never were.” 8 Hardly remarkable, and 
far from the fevered conclusion drawn in Braestrup’s paraphrase. 

Examples of what Braestrup calls “straw man journalism” abound in his 
own presentation. Thus he faults the media for claiming that the pacification 
program had been destroyed, whereas his own conclusion is that “pacification, 
although hit hard, was not ‘dead’... it was a mixed picture, but clearly neither 
a military nor a psychological ‘disaster’ ” ( 1 ,716). The media regularly reported 
that pacification was hit hard, not dead, as his own evidence clearly shows—in 
contrast to the Pentagon, which took a more pessimistic view, as we shall see 
directly. Braestrup’s “straw man journalism” may impress careless readers 
cifinuning the text for dramatic conclusions, but it presents no evidence and 
amounts to no argument. 

Braestrup refers sarcastically to “insights into Vietnamese psychology,” as 
when Morley Safer, watching marines burning down huts in Cam Ne, con¬ 
cluded that a peasant whose home was destroyed would find it hard to believe 
“that we are on his side” (I, 43). How does Safer know? Perhaps the peasant 
enjoyed watching the flames. Not all such “psychoanalyzing” is derided, how¬ 
ever, as when General Westmoreland explains that “the people in the cities 
are largely indignant at the Vietcong for violating the sanctity of the Tet period 
and for their tactics which brought about damage to the cities” (II, 164), or 
when he expounds on the peasant “state of mind” (I, 78). Note that Safer is 
not criticized for accepting the tacit assumption that the press is an agency of 
the invading army (“we are on his side”). 

Braestrup states that “the embassy fight became the whole Tet offensive on 
TV and in the newspapers during that offensive’s second day” (his emphasis; 
1,126); this illustration of the incompetence of the media is thoroughly refuted 
by his story index. He also claims that the media exaggerated VC success in 
the early confusion by claiming that the embassy had been entered—failing, 
however, to compare these accounts with the reports by military police that 
they were taking fire from inside the embassy, or the message log of the 716th 
MP Battalion, which reads: “General Westmoreland calls; orders first priority 
effort to recapture U.S. Embassy” ( 1 ,92; our emphasis). It is intriguing to read 
Braestrup’s outrage over quite accurate press reporting of what was said by 
Westmoreland, military police involved in the fight, and others, and in particu¬ 
lar over the fact that the press did not simply rely on Westmoreland’s later 
account (his apparent belief that the embassy had been “captured” goes be¬ 
yond any reporter’s error that Braestrup cites). A careful reading shows that 
media reports were surprisingly accurate, given the confusion of the moment, 
although one cannot fault Braestrup’s profound conclusion that “first reports 
are always partly wrong,” which will come as a startling insight to the working 
journalist. 
