85. Of course, there was an even deeper hypocrisy in failing to call attention 
to the administration’s devotion to a free election in Nicaragua but not in 
Chile, Indonesia, Namibia, or South Korea, among many others, and its pre¬ 
tense that the elections in the terror states of El Salvador and Guatemala are 
free and have anything to do with democracy. 

86. The New York Times had an article on the numerous observers in Nicara¬ 
gua, but before the election (“Election Draws Many U.S. Observers,” Nov. 4, 
1984). The thrust of the article was to suggest observer bias favorable to the 
Sandinistas, a subject the Times never addresses in regard to official observers. 
In later discussion of the elections, the 450 observers, including even the 
professional society of Latin American scholars, were entirely ignored by the 
Times. An excellent study by Lucinda Broadbent, “Nicaragua’s Elections: A 
Cruz Around the Issues; Comparative Analysis of Media Coverage of the 1984 
Elections,” as yet unpublished, parallels our findings in detail, based on an 
analysis of a wide sample, including U.S. network TV and the British as well 
as U.S. press. Broadbent points out that in her sample, the opposition to the 
Nicaraguan government is given more than twice the space accorded the 
government, “an unusual priority for media usually so wedded to ‘official 
sources’ in whichever country they find themselves” (p. 77). Broadbent 
stresses, as we do, the domination of the Reaganite frame, even in Britain and 
in the liberal press, and the massive distortion of reality that resulted from this 
biased framing. She notes also that the media never addressed the programs 
of the contesting parties in Nicaragua, which allowed Reaganite cliches about 
Sandinista intentions and policies to prevail. The media portrayals were 
“roughly the opposite of what was witnessed by international observers of the 
election” (p. 99), which is why, in our view, these observers had to be ignored. 

87. For further details, see Noam Chomsky, “Introduction,” in Morris Morley 
and James Petras, The Reagan Administration and Nicaragua , Institute for 
Media Analysis, Monograph 1 (New York: 1987), note 32, which also discusses 
the distortion of the Dutch observers’ report by Robert Leiken in the New York 
Review of Books, December 5,1985. Leiken dismisses the LASA report without 
comment as pro-Sandinista, i.e., as coming to the wrong conclusions. 

88. LASA, Report, p. 2. 

89. This was partially true, as the Sandinistas were trying to alter their image. 
But the same was true in El Salvador, with the added problem that the election 
was held in an environment of ongoing state terror. Time never used the word 
“theatre” to describe either of the two Salvadoran elections. 

90. As in 1982, the FMLN carried out no military operations directed at the 



362 NOTES TO PAGES 118-126 


NOTES TO PAGES 126-139 363 


election-day process, and made no threats against Salvadoran voters. But as 
in 1982, this has no impact on Time reporting. The real threats, broadcast to 
voters in Nicaragua by contra radio, and the several contra killings of poll 
watchers, were never reported by Time . 

As we have noted, the stress on superficialities like long lines is part of the 
propaganda agenda for a demonstration election. So is blacking out the fact 
that the length of the lines might be a function of the restricted number of 
voting booths, as was the case in El Salvador. Time provides both the emphasis 
on long lines and the suppression of relevant evidence on why the lines were 
so long. See Herman and Brodhead, Demonstration Elections , pp. 126-27. 

91. Cruz was mentioned by Kinzer in eleven, and quoted, usually at some 
length, in five, of the fourteen articles he wrote on the Nicaraguan election; 
disruption and harassment are mentioned or featured in seven of the articles. 

92. See particularly his “Sandinista Is Favored but Runs Hard” (Oct. 30, 
1984), “Going Through the Motions in Nicaragua” (Nov. 4), and “Sandinistas 
Hold Their First Elections” (Nov. 5). 

93. We will see below that Time even tries to make out a coercive threat that 
produced the vote in Nicaragua. 

94. See the quotation from Warren Hoge given above, on p. 108. 

95. These points were discussed in the LASA report, as we note below, but 
for Kinzer and the rest of the mass media, they were off the agenda. 

96. Note that the exact opposite is true in the United States, reflecting the 
recognition on the part of the general public in both societies of who stands 
to gain through the electoral process. 

97. The rate was, in fact, far higher than in the 1984 U.S. presidential election, 
in which just over half the electorate participated. 

98. “Sandinistas Hold Their First Election,” New York Times , November 5, 
1984. 

99. Duarte is quoted to this effect by Edward Schumacher in the New York 
Times , February 21, 1981. 

100. On April 23,1985, the Wall Street Journal revealed that Cruz was on the 
CIA payroll. Oliver North then took over his financing, hoping that this might 
divert attention from the fact that Cruz had been funded by the CIA during 
the period when the U.S. government was trying to discredit the Nicaraguan 
elections. See Stephen Engelberg, New York Times, July 15, 1987. 

101. Stephen Kinzer, “Ex-Contra Looks Back Finding Much to Regret,” New 
