have highlighted the Times ’s suppression of facts concerning the cor¬ 
ruption of SISMI and raised questions about coaching. This would 
have disturbed the propaganda line. 

The trial in Rome was awkward for the Western media, as Agca 
quickly declared himself to be Jesus and, more important, failed to 
produce any supportive evidence backing up his claims of Bulgarian 
involvement. The diligent and extensive court investigation found nu¬ 
merous Gray Wolves links to Agca in the period just up to his assassina¬ 
tion attempt, but no witness to his (allegedly) numerous meetings with 
Bulgarians in Rome, no money, no car, and, in the end, no conviction. 
As we have pointed out, in addition to the already available evidence 
of atrocious prison practice in dealing with Agca, and the 1981 meetings 
with intelligence officials and Martella’s offer, there was a steady ac¬ 
cumulation of claims and evidence of pressures on Agca to implicate 
the Bulgarians. But, despite this evidence and the failure to convict the 
Bulgarians after a lengthy investigation and trial, the mass media of the 
West never provided any serious reevaluations of the case. Almost 
uniformly they hid behind the fact that an Italian court dismissed the 
case for lack of evidence rather than demonstrated innocence. They 
never hinted at the possibility that an Italian court and jury might still 
be biased against the Eastern bloc and protective of the powerful 
Western interests that had supported the Bulgarian Connection so 
energetically. 

The mass media also never looked back at their own earlier claims 
and those of the disinformationists to see how they had stood up to the 
test of accumulated evidence. On January 3,1983, Newsweek had quoted 
an Italian official who said that “we have substantial evidence ... [that] 
Agca operated in close contact with the Bulgarians," and the New York 
Times editorialized on October 20,1984, that “Agca’s accounts of meet¬ 
ings with Bulgarian officials are verifiable in important details." If there 
was “substantial evidence” and “verifiable” details long before the trial, 
why was this evidence not produced in the courtroom? Why, after an 
enormous further investigative effort was there still not enough evi¬ 
dence to sustain a conviction? The U.S. mass media didn’t even try to 
answer these questions. This would mean asking serious questions 
about the validity of the SHK model and considering alternatives, 
which the media have never been prepared to do. For them, the alterna¬ 
tive model, plausible from the beginning and, by March 1986, based on 
a great deal of evidence, was still the “Bulgarian view.” The questions 




THE KGB-BULG ARIAN PLOT TO KILL THE POPE 167 


raised by the “Bulgarian view/ 5 we believej would have been applied 
by the U.S. mass media to analogous facts in a Moscow setting. This 
means that the view actually employed by the media from beginning to 
end was a “U.S, government view/ 5 as suggested by a propaganda 
model. That this was true even after the trial ended we show in a 
detailed analysis in appendix 3, “Tagliabue’s Finale on the Bulgarian 
Connection: A Case Study in Bias. 55 



The Indochina Wars (I): 

Vietnam 


ft^EDIA COVERAGE OF THE U.S. WARS IN INDOCHINA HAS EN- 
gendered a good deal of bitter controversy* some close analysis of 
several specific incidents* and a few general studies * 1 It is widely held 
that the media “lost the war” by exposing the general population to its 
horrors and by unfair, incompetent* and biased coverage reflecting the 
“adversary culture” of the sixties. The media’s reporting of the Tet 
offensive has served as the prime example of this hostility to established 
power* which* it has been argued* undermines democratic institutions 
and should be curbed, either by the media themselves or by the state. 

A propaganda model leads to different expectations. On its assump¬ 
tions, we would expect media coverage and interpretation of the war 
to take for granted that the United States intervened in the service of 
generous ideals, with the goal of defending South Vietnam from aggres¬ 
sion and terrorism and in the interest of democracy and self-determina¬ 
tion* With regard to the second-level debate on the performance of the 
media* a propaganda model leads us to expect that there would be no 
condemnation of the media for uncritical acceptance of the doctrine of 



170 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


U.S. benevolence and for adherence to the official line on all central 
issues, or even awareness of these characteristics of media performance. 
Rather, given that the U.S. government did not attain all of its objec¬ 
tives in Indochina, the issue would be whether the media are to be 
faulted for undermining the noble cause by adopting too “adversarial” 
a stance and departing thereby from fairness and objectivity. 

We shall see that all of these expectations are amply fulfilled. 


5.1* THE BOUNDS OF 
CONTROVERSY 

