a response to William Shawcross’s warnings of “the end of Cam¬ 
bodia, but not before it had left its mark on popular perceptions* and 
many distortions and, indeed, contradictions persist. In his Quality of 
Mercy y Shawcross agrees that, as Vickery had concluded, there was no 
large-scale famine of the character initially reported, 24 but he later 
wrote that the Heng Samrin regime '"was responsible for creating many 
of the conditions that caused the famine'* in Cambodia, These conflict¬ 
ing accounts were noted by Australian Cambodia scholar Ben Kieman, 
who suggested a partial explanation: “There was a threat of famine, as 
the Heng Samrin government proclaimed in mid-1979. But it was offset 
by the small but crucial December-January harvest, which Shawcross 
hardly mentions, and by the massive international aid program, which 
he regularly denigrates." 25 

The eagerness to uncover Vietnamese villainy in “ending Cam¬ 
bodia," the easy reliance on sources known ro be unreliable, 26 and the 
subsequent evasions after the accusations dissolve are readily explained 
by U.S, (indeed, general Western-bloc) hostility to Vietnam, which led 
the United States to align itself quietly with Pol Pot and to transform 
its alleged concern over Cambodians to the victims of the Vietnamese 
occupation. 

Phase III also had 3 domestic US, aspect that is highly relevant to 
our concerns- In an intriguing exercise, characteristic of system-sup¬ 
portive propaganda campaigns, it was charged that the horrors of phase 
II were passed over in “silence” at the time. This alleged fact, devel¬ 
oped in William Shawcross’s influential book Quality ofMercy 3 elicited 
much commentary on “Holocaust and Modem Conscience," the subti¬ 
tle of Shawcross’s book, and on the failure of civilized people to react 
appropriately to ongoing atrocities. In “Phase III at home" (p, 288), we 
will turn to the merits of this charge with regard to phase II. As for 
phase I of “the decade of the genocide," the charge of silence is dis¬ 
tinctly applicable, but it was never raised, then or now, nor is phase I 
designated a period of “holocaust" or “genocide” in mainstream litera¬ 
ture. Phase I elicited no calls for international intervention or trials for 
crimes against humanity, and it has since been largely expunged from 
the record. In retrospect, the harshest critics within the mainstream 
attribute “the destruction of Cambodian society” during phase I to 
“years of warfare” and “careless policies of the White House, 5 * nothing 
more 27 The issue of U.S. bombing of Cambodia did arise during the 
Watergate hearings, but the primary concern there was the failure to 
notify Congress, 

Michael Vickery suggests an “interesting comparison which an in- 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (ll): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 263 


vestigative journalist might make” if truly concerned about the prob¬ 
lems of the region—namely* between Cambodia* during phase III* and 
Thailand, “where there has been no war, foreign invasion* carpet 
bombing* nor revolution, and where foreign investment is massive and 
the sympathy of the most advanced western powers is enjoyed* 55 but 
where conditions in the peasant society were so terrible that “since 1980 
substantial foreign ‘refugee 5 aid near the border has been given to 
‘Affected Thai Villagers, 5 whose health and living standard, much to the 
shock of foreign aid personnel* were found to be little better than the 
condition of Cambodian refugees,” 2 * No such comparison was under¬ 
taken* nor was there even a flicker of concern over simultaneous re¬ 
ports, buried in appropriate obscurity* about the tens of thousands of 
children, many under ten years old* working as “virtual slaves” in Thai 
factories resembling concentration camps, 29 nor over the normal condi¬ 
tions of peasant life in the region* now exposed to the visitors flocking 
to the border camps to witness the consequences of Communist terror 
and express their compassion for its victims. 

The actual scale of the slaughter and destruction during the two 
authentic phases of large-scale killings during the “decade of the geno¬ 
cide 55 (phases I and II) would be difficult to estimate at best, and the 
problems have been compounded by a virtual orgy of falsification serv¬ 
ing political ends that are all too obvious. 30 The Finnish Inquiry Com¬ 
mission estimates that about 600*000 people in a population of over 
seven million died during phase I, while two million people became 
refugees. 31 For the second phase* they give 75,000 to 150*000 as a 
“realistic estimate 55 for outright executions, and a figure of roughly one 
million dead from killings* hunger, disease, and overwork. Vickery 5 s 
analysis is the most careful attempt to sort out the confused facts to 
date. He accepts as plausible a “war loss 55 of over 500,000 for the first 
phase* calculated from the CIA estimates but lower than their conclu¬ 
sions (see note 31), and about 750*000 “deaths in excess of normal and 
due to the special conditions of f)K,” with perhaps 200,000 to 300,000 
executed and a total population decline for this period of about 
400*ooo. 32 

These estimates, the most careful currently available in print to our 
knowledge, suggest that the toll under phase II of “the genocide 55 is 
somewhat greater than that under phase I, although not radically dif¬ 
ferent in scale. But before accepting these figures at face value we must 
bear in mind that part of the death toll under phase II must be at¬ 
tributed to the conditions left by the U.S. war. As the war ended, deaths 
from starvation in Phnom Penh alone were running at about 100,000 
a year, and the U.S* airlift that kept the population alive was immedi- 



264 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


