in January 1968, according to Pentagon sources, North Vietnamese 
units, mainly drawing U-S. forces away from populated centers, were 
at about the level of Korean and Thai mercenaries who were terrorizing 
South Vietnam, all vastly outnumbered by the U*S* forces. 

By 1967, the war had reached such a level of devastation that, in 
FalPs words, “Vietnam as a cultural and historic entity .. * is threatened 
with extinction . *. [as]. *. the countryside literally dies under the blows 
of the largest military machine ever unleashed on an area of this size.” 42 
The strategy of destroying South Vietnam was generally considered a 
success. Harvard professor and government adviser Samuel Hunting- 
ton concluded that “In an absent-minded way the United States in 
Vietnam may well have stumbled upon the answer to "wars of national 
liberation, 1 ” namely, “forced-draft urbanization and mobilization” by 
violence so extreme as “to produce a massive migration from country¬ 
side to city,” thus “undercutting” the Maoist strategy of organizing the 
peasant population (over 80 percent of the population when these 
techniques were initiated) and undermining the Viet Cong, “a powerful 
force which cannot be dislodged from its constituency so long as the 
constituency continues to exist*” 43 

The Tet offensive of January 1968, conducted almost entirely by 
South Vietnamese NLF forces in cities and towns throughout the 
country, convinced U.S- elites that the war was proving too costly to 
the United States, and that strategy should shift toward a more “capi¬ 
tal-intensive” operation with reliance on an indigenous mercenary 
army (in the technical sense of the phrase) and gradual withdrawal of 
the U.S* forces, which were by then suffering a severe loss of morale, 
a matter of growing concern to military authorities. U*S, forces under¬ 
took a post-Tet “accelerated pacification campaign,” in actuality a 
mass-murder operation that demolished the NLF and much of what 
was left of the peasant society while killing tens of thousands and 
extending the destruction of the country. Much of North Vietnam, 



184 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


particularly the southern region* was turned into a moonscape* and 
Laos was battered under the heaviest bombing in history* including the 
peasant society of northern Laos where, the U.S, government 
conceded* the bombing had no relation to its war in South Vietnam. 
The United States bombed and invaded Cambodia* destroying much of 
the countryside and mobilizing embittered peasants to the cause of the 
Khmer Rouge* previously a marginal force. By the war's end* the death 
toll in Indochina may have reached four million or more* 44 and the land 
and societies were utterly devastated. Subsequent U.S. policy has 
sought to prevent any recovery from this cataclysm by refusing repara¬ 
tions, aid, and trade* and blocking assistance from other sources— 
