
1 

NA 

20, Stamping identification 

NA 

NA 

cards 

21. Legal requirement to check 

NA 

NA 

voting 

22. Nonlegal threat to 

1 

4*8 

nonvoters 

23, Use of transparent voting 

NA 

NA 

urns 

24. Security force presence at 

NA 

NA 


voting stations 


* Based on a study of 21 news articles appearing between Sept, 5 and Nov, 
6 S 1984. 

NA = Not Applicable 


It can readily be seen in table 3-1 that in the Salvadoran election the 
Times's news coverage dealt heavily with subjects above the line and 
neglected the basic conditions that make an election meaningful in 



LEGITIMIZING VERSUS MEANINGLESS THIRD WORLD ELECTIONS iyj 


advance. We can observe how the Times totally ignores the question of 
freedom of the press* organizational freedom, and limits on the ability 
of candidates to run, 108 Table 3-2 shows how the Times treated the 
forthcoming Nicaraguan election in the same two-month period cov¬ 
ered in table 3-1. It is evident that the paper focuses heavily on the 
fundamental conditions of a free election* i,e, } on topics that it was 
entirely ignoring while addressing the Salvadoran election. Table 3-3 
shows the breakdown of topics covered by the Times during the Nica¬ 
raguan election later in the year. Again* although the differences are less 
marked than the ones in tables 3-1 and 3-2* the substantial attention to 
basic conditions in the Nicaraguan case is clear, reflecting editorial 
news choices that follow a patriotic agenda. As the basic conditions for 
a free election were superior in Nicaragua and the coercive elements 
less acute* the emphasis on basic conditions only in the Nicaraguan case 
is even more clearly evidence of systematic bias. 


3*8. THE MIG CRISIS STAGED 
DURING NICARAGUA’S 
ELECTION WEEK 

As Newsweek pointed out on November 19* 1984* “The story of the 
freighter [to Nicaragua, allegedly carrying MIGs] first broke during the 
election-night coverage*” but at no point does Newsweek (or Time, the 
Times, or CBS News) suggest that the timing was deliberate. The Times, 
in its extensive coverage of the MIGs that weren’t there, at one point 
quotes a Nicaraguan official who suggests that the crisis was purely a 
public-relations operation* but that exhausts the Times’s exploration of 
this point. Although the MIGs weren’t there, and the timing was per¬ 
fect for diverting attention from a successful election that the Reagan 
adminstration had been attempting to discredit, the elite media asked 
no questions* even in retrospect. The administration claimed that when 
the freighter was loaded* satellite observation was blocked so that the 
cargo was unknown. The mass media presented this as fact* making no 
effort to evaluate the claim. 

What the media chose to focus on was administration assessments of 
what it might do if MIGs were in fact being delivered. This allowed 
