population, with another tenth uprooted in this “fratricidal strife that 
was increased to tragic proportions by warring outsiders,” The “fratri¬ 
cidal strife” might well have been terminated by the 1958 coalition 
government had it not been for “outsiders," with the United States 
playing a decisive role throughout, a role completely ignored in this 
purported historical analysis apart from a few misleading comments. At 
this late date, the Times continued to pretend that the U.S. bombing 
was directed against North Vietnamese supply trails—nothing else is 
mentioned. The crucial events of the actual history also disappear, or 
are grossly misrepresented. Subsequent reporting also regularly 
obliterated the U.S, role in creating the devastation and postwar “prob¬ 
lems” attributed to the Communists alone, a shameful evasion in the 
light of the undisputed historical facts, 19 

Once again, the media record, less than glorious, is well explained 
throughout by the propaganda model. 


6,2. CAMBODIA 


6.2.1. “The decade of the genocide*’ 

Few countries have suffered more bitterly than did Cambodia during 
the 1970s- The “decade of the genocide,” as the period is termed by the 
Finnish Inquiry Commission that attempted to assess what had taken 
place, 20 consisted of three phases—now extending the time scale to the 
present* which bears a heavy imprint of these terrible years: 

Phase I: From 1969 through April 1975, U.S. bombing at a histori¬ 
cally unprecedented level and a civil war sustained by the United 
States left the country in utter ruins. Though Congress legislated 
an end to the bombing in August 1973, U.S* government participa¬ 
tion in the ongoing slaughter continued until the Khmer Rouge 
victory in April 1975. 21 

Phase II: From April 1975 through 1978 Cambodia was subjected 
to the murderous rule of the Khmer Rouge (Democratic Kampu¬ 
chea, DK), overthrown by the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia 
in December 1978, ^ 




THE INDOCHINA WARS ( 11 ): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 26 l 


Phase III: Vietnam installed the Heng Samrin regime in power in 
Cambodia* but the Democratic Kampuchea (DK) coalition, based 
primarily on the Khmer Rouge* maintained international recogni¬ 
tion apart from the Soviet bloc* Reconstructed with the aid of 
China and the United States on the Thai-Cambodia border and 
in Thai bases, the Khmer Rouge guerrillas* the only effective DK 
military force, continue to carry out activities in Cambodia of a 
sort called “terrorist” when a friendly government is the target. 


We turn now to the travail of Cambodia during these grim years, and 
the way it has been depicted, first with some preliminary observations 
and then in further detail* phase by phase. 


6*2.2* Problems of scale and 
responsibility 

The three phases of the “decade of the genocide*' have fared quite 
differently in the media and general culture* and in a way that conforms 
well to the expectations of a propaganda model* Phase I, for which the 
United States bore primary responsibility* was little investigated at the 
time, or since, and has never been described with anything like the 
condemnatory terms applied to phase II* The vast number of Cambodi¬ 
ans killed, injured* and traumatized in this period were, in our concep¬ 
tualization of chapter 2, “unworthy” victims. 

Phase II, the Pol Pot era, is the “holocaust” that was widely com¬ 
pared to the worst atrocities of Hitler and Stalin* virtually from the 
outset, with massive publicity and outrage at the suffering of these 
“worthy” victims. 

Phase III renewed the status of the people of Cambodia as worthy 
victims* suffering under Vietnamese rule. The Vietnamese being official 
enemies of the United States, they quickly became the villains of the 
piece* responsible for unspeakable conditions within Cambodia and 
guilty of unprovoked aggression. Meanwhile* the United States backed 
its ally China as it conducted a punitive invasion of Vietnam in Febru¬ 
ary 1979 and reconstructed the defeated Pol Pot forces* 

In the early stages of phase III, it was alleged “that the Vietnamese 
are now conducting a subtle "genocide* in Cambodia,” a charge tacitly 
endorsed in a CIA demographic study* which estimated a population 
drop of 700,000 during “the first year of the Heng Samrin rule,” 22 This 
new “holocaust” was constructed on the basis of serious misinterpreta- 




262 manufacturing consent 


tion of available evidence, as was demonstrated by Michael Vickery in 
