
801 

670 

10,731 


NA = not available 

i. The asset total is taken from Forbes magazine’s wealth total for the New- 
house family for 1985; the total revenue is for media sales only* as reported 
in Advertising Age, June 29, 1987. 

i. Cox Communications was publicly owned until 1985* when it was merged 
into another Cox family company* Cox Enterprises. The data presented 
here are for year-end 1984* the last year of public ownership and disclosure 
of substantial financial information. 

Data compiled in William Barrett, “Citizens Rich,” Forbes, Dec, 14, 1987, 

4 . These data are in Australian dollars and are for June 30, 1986; at that date 
the Australian dollar was worth ^/ioo of a U.S, dollar. 

5 . Data for 1985* as presented in the New York Times, Feb. 9, 1986. 

Total revenue for media sales only, as reported in Advertising Age, June 29, 
1987. 

7 . Storer came under the control of the Wall Street firm Kohlberg Kravis 
Roberts & Co. in 1985; the data here are for December 1984, the last period 
of Storer autonomy and publicly available information. 

8 . Total revenue for media sales only; from Advertising Age, June 29, 1987, 

9 . Total assets as of 1984-85, based on “Mort Zuckcrcnan, Media’s New 
Mogul*” Fortune, Oct. 14, 1985; total revenue from Advertising Age, June 
29* 1987. 


have intensified in recent years as media stocks have become market 
favorites^ and actual or prospective owners of newspapers and televi¬ 
sion properties have found it possible to capitalize increased audience 
size and advertising revenues into multiplied values of the media fran¬ 
chises—and great wealth. 18 This has encouraged the entry of specula¬ 
tors and increased the pressure and temptation to focus more 
intensively on profitability. Family owners have been increasingly di¬ 
vided between those wanting to take advantage of the new opportuni¬ 
ties and those desiring a continuation of family control, and their splits 


S manufacturing consent 


have often precipitated crises leading finally to the sale of the family 
interest, 19 

This trend toward greater integration of the media into the market 
system has been accelerated by the loosening of rules limiting media 

tt)Tuiu\ by ntm-media compa¬ 
nies. 20 There has also been an abandonment of restrictions—previously 
quite feeble anyway—on radio-TV commercials* entertainment- 
mayhem programming* and “fairness doctrine” threats, opening the 
door to the unrestrained commercial use of the airwaves. 21 

The greater profitability of the media in a deregulated environment 
has also led to an increase in takeovers and takeover threats* with even 
giants like CBS and Time* Inc.* directly attacked or threatened. This 
has forced the managements of the media giants to incur greater debt 
and to focus ever more aggressively and unequivocally on profitability* 
in order to placate owners and reduce the attractiveness of their proper¬ 
ties to outsiders, 22 They have lost some of their limited autonomy to 
bankers, institutional investors* and large individual investors whom 
they have had to solicit as potential “white knights.” 23 

While the stock of the great majority of large media firms is traded 
on the securities markets* approximately two-thirds of these companies 
are either closely held or still controlled by members of the originating 
family who retain large blocks of stock. This situation is changing as 
family ownership becomes diffused among larger numbers of heirs and 
the market opportunities for selling media properties continue to im¬ 
prove* but the persistence of family control is evident in the data shown 
in table 1-2, Also evident in the table is the enormous wealth possessed 
by the controlling families of the top media firms. For seven of the 
twenty-four, the market value of the media properties owned by the 
controlling families in the mid-1980s exceeded a billion dollars* and 
the median value was close to half a billion dollars. 24 These control 
groups obviously have a special stake in the status quo by virtue of their 
wealth and their strategic position in one of the great institutions of 
society. And they exercise the power of this strategic position* if only 
by establishing the general aims of the company and choosing its top 
management. 25 

The control groups of the media giants are also brought into close 
relationships with the mainstream of the corporate community through 
boards of directors and social links. In the cases of NBC and the Group 
W television and cable systems* their respective parents* GE and West- 
inghouse* are themselves mainstream corporate giants, with boards of 
directors that are dominated by corporate and banking executives. 
