but as the London Economist accurately observed, “an invader is an 
invader unless invited in by a government with some claim to legiti¬ 
macy,” 21 and the government that the Soviet Union installed to invite 
it in plainly lacked any such claim. 

None of these matters elicit serious controversy, nor should they. 
The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, like earlier cases of Soviet inter¬ 
vention in the region occupied by the Red Army as it drove out the 
Nazis during World War II, are described as aggression, and the facts 
are reported in these terms. The United Nations has repeatedly con¬ 
demned the Soviet aggression in Afghanistan and regularly investigates 
and denounces the crimes they have committed. Western reporters 
cover the war from the standpoint of the rebels defending their country 
from foreign attack, entering Afghanistan with them from their Pakis¬ 
tani sanctuaries. Official Soviet pronouncements are treated not merely 
with skepticism but with disdain. 

In the case of the U.S, intervention in Indochina, no such interpreta¬ 
tion has ever been conceivable, apart from “the wild men in the wings,” 
although it is at least as well grounded as the standard, and obviously 
correct, interpretation of the Soviet aggression in Afghanistan. Further¬ 
more, the reporting practice of journalists and commentators is also 
radically different in the two cases. We put off for a moment the more 
significant issue of how the war is understood, focusing first on the 
narrower question of journalistic practice. 

In sharp contrast to the Soviet aggression, it was standard practice 
throughout the Indochina war for journalists to report Washington 


THE INDOCHINA WARS (l): VIETNAM 177 


pronouncements as fact* even in the extreme case when official state¬ 
ments were known to be false. Furthermore* this practice persisted 
through the period when the media had allegedly had become “a nota¬ 
ble new source of national power" threatening government authority. 
To mention only one typical case from the year in which* we are to 
understand* this status had been definitively attained (see p. 170)* in 
March 1970 the media reported a North Vietnamese invasion of Laos 
on the basis of a speech by President Nixon announcing that North 
Vietnamese forces in Laos had suddenly risen from 50*000 to 67*000. 
Nixon’s comment came immediately after the U.S. military attache in 
Vientiane had presented his standard briefing citing the lower figure—a 
source of much private amusement among the press corps in Vientiane* 
as one of us witnessed at first hand—but the presidential fabrication 
was reported as fact. The lower figure was also fraudulent, although this 
fact was never reported. 22 Throughout the Indochina wars, when offi¬ 
cial statements were questioned* it was generally on the basis of U.S. 
military sources in the field* so that reporting and analysis remained 
well within the bounds set by U.S. power- 23 

Only very rarely did U.S. reporters make any effort to see the war 
from the point of view of “the enemy"—the peasants of South Vietnam* 
Laos* or later Cambodia—or to accompany the military forces of “the 
enemy” resisting the U.S. assault. Such evidence as was available was 
ignored or dismissed. In reporting the war in Afghanistan, it is consid¬ 
ered essential and proper to observe it from the standpoint of the 
victims. In the case of Indochina* it was the American invaders who 
were regarded as the victims of the “aggression” of the Vietnamese* and 
the war was reported from their point of view, just as subsequent 
commentary* including cinema* views the war from this perspective. 

Refugee testimony* which could have provided much insight into the 
nature of the war* was also regularly ignored. The enemy of the U.S. 
government was the enemy of the press* which could not even refer to 
them by their own name: they were the “Viet Cong*" a derogatory term 
of U.S.-Saigon propaganda, not the National Liberation Front, a 
phrase “never used without quotation marks" by American reporters, 54 
who regularly referred to “Communist aggression” (E. W. Kenworthy) 
by the South Vietnamese in South Vietnam and Communist efforts “to 
subvert this country" (David Halberstam) 25 —their country* then under 
the rule of a U.S.-imposed client regime. 

To a substantial extent* the war was reported from Washington, In 
late 1970, when the process of elite defection was well under way* Los 
Angeles Times Washington correspondent Jules Witcover described the 
Washington scene during the earlier years: 



178 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


While the press corps m those years diligently reported what the 
government said about Vietnam, and questioned the inconsisten¬ 
cies as they arose, too few sought out opposing viewpoints and 
expertise until too late, when events and the prominence of the 
Vietnam dissent could no longer be ignored. In coverage of the 
war, the press corps 5 job narrowed down to three basic tasks— 
reporting what the government said, finding out whether it was 
true, and assessing whether the policy enunciated worked. The 
group did a highly professional job on the first task. But it fell 
down on the second and third, and there is strong evidence the 
reason is too many reporters sought the answers in all three cate¬ 
gories from the same basic source—the government. 26 

The search for “opposing viewpoints 55 as things went wrong was also 
extremely narrow, limited to the domain of tactics—that is, limited to 
the question of “whether the policy enunciated worked,” viewed en¬ 
