

INTRODUCTION XXIX 


moved quickly on without reassessing their performance or the fact that 
they and their media colleagues had been agents of propaganda* 

The New York Times t which had been consistently supportive of the 
connection in both news and editorials, not only failed to report Wein¬ 
stein’s negative findings from the search of the Bulgarian files, it also 
excluded Goodman's statement on the CIA’s penetration of the Bulgar¬ 
ian secret services from their excerpts from his testimony. The Times had 
long maintained that the CIA and the Reagan administration “recoiled 
from the devastating implication that Bulgaria’s agents were bound to 
have acted only on a signal from Moscow* 5 ’ 58 But Goodman’s and Ford’s 
testimony showed that this was the reverse of the truth, and that CIA 
heads William Casey and Robert Gates overrode the views of CIA pro¬ 
fessionals and falsified evidence to support a Soviet linkage. The Times 
was not aione in following a misleading party line, but it is notable that 
this paper of record has yet to acknowledge its exceptional gullibility and 
propaganda service* 


VIETNAM, LAOS, AND CAMBODIA 

Vietnam: Was the United States a 
Victim or an Aggressor? 

In chapters 5 through 7, we show that media coverage of the Indochina 
wars fits the propaganda model very well. The United States first in¬ 
tervened in Indochina immediately after World War II in support of 
French recolonization, after which it carried out a rwenty-one-year effort 
(1954-75) to impose a government in the southern half of Vietnam that 
U.S. officials and analysts consistently recognized as lacking any substan¬ 
tial indigenous support, and in opposition to local nationalist—though 
Communist—forces that were understood to have a mass base. U.S. 
leaders operated on the belief that their overwhelming military might 
would not only enable them, but entitled them, to force submission to a 
minority government of US. choice* 

By normal word usage this would make the U*S* effort in Vietnam a 
case of “aggression.” The mainstream media, however, rarely if ever 
found US. policy there to be other than highly moral and well inten- 
tioned, even if based on miscalculation of its costs—to us (see chapter 5). 
The media readily accepted that we were protecting “South Vietnam”—a 



XXX introduction 


U.S* creation ruled by a dictator imported directly from the United 
States—'against somebody else’s aggression* vacillating in their identifica¬ 
tion of the aggressor between North Vietnam, the Soviet Union* China* 
or the resistance in South Vietnam engaging in “internal aggression”! It is 
compelling evidence of the propaganda service of the mainstream media 
that throughout the war they accepted this basic propaganda assumption 
of the war managers, and from that era up to today* we have never found 
a mainstream editorial or news report that characterized the U*S* war 
a gainst Vietnam, and then all of Indochina, as a case of aggression* 

After the United States terminated the military phase of the war in 
1975* it maintained and enforced an eighteen-year boycott of the coun¬ 
try that it had virtually destroyed* According to Vietnamese estimates* 
the war had cost them 3 million killed* 300*000 missing* 4*4 million 
wounded* and 2 million harmed by toxic chemicals; and its land was left 
ravaged by bombs and Rome plows as well as chemical weapons* With 
58,000 killed* the U.S. death toll from the war was under one-tenth of 1 
percent of its population; Vietnam’s death toll was 17 percent of its popu¬ 
lation* and only Vietnam’s people were attacked by chemical warfare and 
had their countryside devastated. 

Nevertheless, U.S. officials and the mainstream media continued to 
view the U.S. role in the war as creditable* the United States as the vic¬ 
tim. President George Bush stated in 1992 that “Hanoi knows today that 
we seek only answers without the threat of retribution for the past*” 59 
That is, the Vietnamese had done things to us that might justify retribu¬ 
tion on our part* but we only seek answers regarding our men missing 
in action. 60 New York Times foreign affairs commentator Leslie Gelb justi¬ 
fied classifying Vietnam an “outlaw” on the grounds that “they had killed 
Americans* 5 ’ 61 This reflects the common establishment view, implicit in 
Bush’s comment, that nobody has a right of self-defense against this 
country, even if it intervenes across the ocean to impose by force a gov¬ 
ernment that the people of that country reject* 


U. S * Chemical Warfare in Indochina 

It is also of interest how the media have treated the massive use of chemi¬ 
cals during the Vietnam War and the horrifying aftermath for the vic¬ 
tim country* In 1961 and 1962 the Kennedy administration authorized 
the use of chemicals to destroy rice crops in South Vietnam—in violation 
of a U.S. tradition as well as international law (Admiral William Leahy* 
in response to a proposal to destroy Japanese rice crops in 1944* stated 
that This would “violate every Christian ethic I have ever heard of and 




