“For the first time in history,” Robert Elegant writes, “the outcome of 
a war was determined not in the battlefield, but on the primed page, 
and above all, on the television screen,” leading to the defeat of the 
United States in Vietnam. The belief that the media, particularly televi¬ 
sion, were responsible for U.S, government failures is widely expressed. 
It was endorsed by the right-wing media-monitoring organization Ac¬ 
curacy in Media in its hour-long “Vietnam Op/Ed” aired by public 
television in response to its own thirteen-part series on the war. 2 Ac¬ 
cording to a more “moderate” expression of this view, the media had 
become a “notable new source of national power” by 1970 as part of 
a general “excess of democracy,” contributing to “the reduction of 
governmental authority” at home and a resulting “decline in the influ¬ 
ence of democracy abroad.” “Broader interests of society and govern¬ 
ment” require that if journalists do not impose “standards of 
professionalism,” “the alternative could well be regulation by the gov¬ 
ernment” to the end of “restoring a balance between government and 
media.” 3 Freedom House Executive-Director Leonard Sussman, com¬ 
menting on Big Story , the study of media coverage of the Tet offensive 
sponsored by Freedom House, describes the “adversarial aspect” of the 
press-government relation as “normal,” presupposing without argu¬ 
ment that it has been demonstrated, but asks: “Must free institutions 
be overthrown because of the very freedom they sustain?” 4 John Roche 
proceeds further still, calling for congressional investigation of “the 
workings of these private governments” who distorted the record in 
pursuit of their “anti-Johnson mission,” although he fears Congress is 
too “terrified of the media” and their awesome power to take on this 
necessary task. 5 

New York Times television critic John Corry defends the media as 


THE INDOCHINA WARS (l): VIETNAM 171 


merely “unmindful, 51 not “unpatriotic 55 as the harsher critics claim. 
They are not “anti-American/ 5 despite their adversarial stance; rather* 
“they reflect a powerful element of the journalistic-titer ary-political 
culture/ 5 where “the left wins battles ... by default 35 because “its ideas 
make up the moral and intellectual framework for a large part of the 
culture/ 5 and “television becomes an accomplice of the left when it 
allows the culture to influence its news judgments/ 5 as in his view it 
regularly does, 6 

Media spokespersons, meanwhile, defend their commitment to inde¬ 
pendence while conceding that they may err through excessive zeal in 
calling the government to account in vigorous pursuit of their role as 
watchdog. 

Within the mainstream, the debate is largely framed within the 
bounds illustrated by the PBS-AIM interchange broadcast on the pub¬ 
lic television network, AIM 5 s “Vietnam Op/Ed” accused PBS of “de¬ 
liberate misrepresentation 55 and other sins, while the producers of the 
documentary defended its accuracy. A dozen commentators, ranging 
from extreme hawks to mild critics of the war such as General Douglas 
Kinnard, added their thoughts. 7 The program concluded with a studio 
wrap-up featuring three “intelligent citizens 55 ; Colonel Harry Summers 
of the Army War College, a hawkish critic of the tactics of the war; 
Peter Braestrup, one of the harshest critics of media war coverage; and 
Huynh Sanh Thong, speaking for what the moderator called “the South 
Vietnamese community, 55 meaning the exile community . 

The hypothesis advanced by the propaganda model, excluded from 
debate as unthinkable, is that in dealing with the American wars in 
Indochina, the media were indeed “unmindful/ 5 but highly “patriotic” 
in the special and misleading sense that they kept—and keep—closely 
to the perspective of official Washington and the closely related corpo¬ 
rate elite, in conformity to the general “journalistic-literary-political 
culture 55 from which “the left 55 (meaning dissident opinion that ques¬ 
tions jingoist assumptions) is virtually excluded. The propaganda 
model predicts that this should be generally true not only of the choice 
of topics covered and the way they are covered, but also, and far more 
crucially, of the general background of presuppositions within which 
the issues are framed and the news presented. Insofar as there is debate 
among dominant elites, it will be reflected within the media, which in 
this narrow sense may adopt an “adversarial stance 35 with regard to 
those holding office, reflecting elite dissatisfaction with current policy. 
Otherwise the media will depart from the elite consensus only rarely 
and in limited ways. Even when large parts of the general public break 
free of the premises of the doctrinal system, as finally happened during 



YJZ MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


the Indochina wars, real understanding based upon an alternative con¬ 
ception of the evolving history can be developed only with considerable 
effort by the most diligent and skeptical* And such understanding as can 
be reached through serious and often individual effort will be difficult 
to sustain or apply elsewhere, an extremely important matter for those 
who are truly concerned with democracy at home and “the influence 
of democracy abroad/ 1 in the real sense of these words* 

These conclusions concerning media conformism are accepted in 
part by mainstream critics of the media* Thus Leonard Sussman, of 
Freedom House, observes that “U.S, intervention in 1965 enjoyed near¬ 
total * * * editorial support.” 8 The “intervention” in 1965 included the 
deployment of U.S. combat forces in Vietnam, the regular bombing of 
North Vietnam, and the bombing of South Vietnam at triple the scale 
in a program of “unlimited aerial warfare inside the country at the price 
