

sponsibility of the United States and Pol Pot for atrocities during “the 
decade of the genocide” as being roughly in the same range. 

Little is known about phase I of “the genocide.” There was little 
interest in ascertaining the facts, at the time or since. The Finnish 
Inquiry Commission Report devotes three cursory pages to the topic, 
because the information available is so meager. The second phase has 
been far more intensively studied, and by now substantial evidence is 
available about what took place. David Chandler and Ben Kieman 
observe that as a result of the intense interest in phase II, “we know 
a great deal more about the texture of daily life in Democratic Kampu¬ 
chea, supposedly a ‘hermit’ regime, than we do about the ostensibly 
open regimes of the Khmer Republic (1970-1975) or the Sihanouk era 
(1954-1970) which preceded it.” 35 Despite this already large imbalance 
in knowledge, the Cambodia Documentation Center in New York City 
concentrates on phase II of the genocide. The dramatic difference in 
the information available for the two phases, and the focus of the 
ongoing research effort, are readily explicable in terms of a propaganda 
model. 

Outside of marginal Maoist circles, there was virtually no doubt from 
early on that the Khmer Rouge regime under the emerging leader Pol 
Pot was responsible for gruesome atrocities. But there were differing 
assessments of the scale and character of these crimes. 

State Department Cambodia specialists were skeptical of the allega¬ 
tions that had received wide publicity by 1977—rightly, so subsequent 
inquiry revealed. The Far Eastern Economic Review based its January 
1979 conclusion that the population had actually risen during the Pol 
Pot period on CIA sources, and its very knowledgeable correspondent 
Nay an Chanda, discussing the background for the Vietnamese inva¬ 
sion, reported that “some observers are convinced that had the Cambo¬ 
dian regime got a year’s reprieve, its internal and international image 
would have been improved enough to make any Vietnamese drive 
difficult if not impossible.” 36 

Differing assessments persisted even after the abundant evidence 
provided by the flow of refugees to Thailand in 1979 and visits to 
Cambodia, which also provided the first significant information about 
the years 1977-78. At one extreme, Pol Pot continued to be described 
as having forged new patterns of genocide comparable to the worst 
excesses of Hitler and Stalin. At the other extreme, we have the postwar 
evaluation by U.S. government specialist Douglas Pike, now head of the 
University of California Indochina Archives, the “independent- 
minded” scholar lauded by Freedom House and the exemplar of the 



