
XXX11 INTRODUCTION 


Vietnam together* the vast majority focused on the harm done to U.S. 
service personnel; only nine articles acknowledged the targeting of food 
crops (thiry-nine mentioned forest cover alone as the target); only eleven 
discussed in any detail the impact on Vietnamese and the Vietnamese 
environment; only three characterized the use of Agent Orange as a 
“chemical weapon” or “chemical warfare;” and in only two articles was it 
suggested that its use might constitute a war crime. 

The Wall Street Journal did have a lead story on this topic in February 
1997* reporting that as many as 500*000 children may have been born 
with dioxin-related deformities and that birth defects in the South were 
four times those in the North. 70 The article did acknowledge U.S. re¬ 
sponsibility for this disaster but contended that “the United States* emo¬ 
tionally spent after losing the war* paid no heed.” But the United States 
did pay heed to the flight of the “boat people” and was not too exhausted 
to enforce a vigorous boycott of the target of its aggression* even if it took 
no responsibility whatever for the condition of its victims. 

The large-scale application of chemical weapons, and napalm* in Viet¬ 
nam was confined to the South, One reason for this was that North Viet¬ 
nam bad a government with links to other countries* so that the use of 
these barbarous and illegal weapons against it would have been widely 
publicized. South Vietnam was occupied by the United States and its 
client regime* so that the victimized people of the South were voiceless 
and could be treated with unlimited savagery. This of course contra¬ 
dicted the claim that we were protecting them against aggression, but the 
media not only underplayed the savagery* they failed to call attention to 
the contradiction and its significance. New York Times journalist Barbara 
Crossette did report that the U.S. failure to get involved in studying the 
effects of chemical warfare in Vietnam had been unfortunate* because as 
this country had used it heavily in the South but not in the North* this 
made Vietnam a controlled experiment in the effects of dioxin on humans 
from which much could be learned of benefit to ourselves. 71 But neither 
Crossette nor any other mainstream reporter had anything to say about 
the fact that the United States had used dioxin only on the ones it was 
allegedly protecting against aggression* nor did they suggest that this 
constituted a serious war crime* or that this country might have an obli¬ 
gation to help those it had victimized. 

During the 1980s, the Reagan administration mounted a major propa¬ 
ganda campaign over alleged victims of “Yellow Rain” in Cambodia 
and Laos* claiming that chemical warfare had been employed there by 
the Soviet Union through its Vietnam proxy. This propaganda effort 
eventually collapsed following the U.S. Army’s own inability to confirm 
this warfare and* more important* the finding that the alleged Yellow 

