elections.” Actually, the occasional press accounts in the United States about 
state-organized murder in Guatemala might have alerted Brier to the possibil¬ 
ity of some constraints on freedom there, but he apparently asked no questions 
and did no reading up on the subject. His inference from numerous parties to 
freedom of speech is a non sequitur —an authoritarian and terror-ridden state 
can easily allow, and may even encourage, a proliferation of candidates within 
a prescribed political spectrum. Brier cites press accounts on constraints on 
freedom of speech in Nicaragua as if this is a relevant subject, but he failed 
to pursue the matter with regard to Guatemala. He also makes the patriotic 
assumption that press accounts in the United States about conditions in client 
and disfavored states are objective. Brier wears blinders in U.S.-sponsored 
elections that he is prepared to set aside in talking about the integrity of an 
election in an enemy state. This dichotomization is openly employed by the 
State Department, and was followed by Hedrick Smith, of the Times, and the 
media more generally, as we have seen. 

Brier distinguished himself as a member of the official delegation to the 
Philippines election of February 1986 won by Ferdinand Marcos by attacking 
the media’s focus on negatives like “violence, vote-buying and fraud,” with the 
result that “they missed entirely the fact that 20 million people conscientiously 
went to the polls without intimidation and wrote down their choice for Presi¬ 
dent” (Robert Pear, quoting Jack Brier, “U.S. Observers Disagree on Extent 
of Philippines Fraud,” New York Times, Feb. 12, 1986). Brier was so accus¬ 
tomed to focusing on the superficial in his apologies for client-state elections 
that he failed to grasp the fact that the administration’s line was in the process 
of shifting—which caused him some embarrassment a few days later, when the 
freedom-loving Marcos was escorted out of the country. 

3. He did not mention or attempt to evaluate actual institutions in Guatemala, 
such as the civil-defense patrols, nor did he or any other member of the 
observer team even mention the pacification program and killings of peasants, 
which had been the subject of innumerable reports. We suspect that Edwards’s 
“research” consisted of advice by the U.S. embassy, in addition to the fact that 
he did not see any peasants killed in his presence. 

4. In the text above, we point out that the terror in Guatemala began with the 
U.S. intervention in 1954, and that its subsequent growth was correlated with 
enlarged U.S. counterinsurgency and police aid and training. See also Edward 

5. Herman, The Real Terror Network (Boston: South End Press, 1982), pp. 
175-76. 


Appendix 2 

1. Immediately after the shooting of the pope in 1981, Tagliabue, then a Times 
correspondent in West Germany, wrote some enlightening articles on Agca’s 
Turkish Fascist connections. All of this material was ignored by Tagliabue 
after he became the Times' s correspondent at the Rome trial in 1985. His first 




392 NOTES TO PAGES 313-326 


NOTES TO PAGES 327-329 393 


story on the trial, significantly, was coauthored with Claire Sterling, and his 
coverage of the trial remained faithful to her model. 

2. The Plot to Kill the Pope (New York: Scribner’s, 1985), p. 196. 

3. For example, Martella’s lack of control over Agca’s visitors and reading 
materials badly compromised the case, as did the distressing number of leaks 
that came out of his supposedly secret investigation. See Edward S. Herman 
and Frank Brodhead, The Rise and Fall of the Bulgarian Connection (New York: 
Sheridan Square Publications, 1986), pp. 118-20. 

4. Ibid., pp. I02ff. 

5. Ibid., pp. 14--15, for further discussion of the alleged Soviet motive. 

6. Ibid., chapter 5. 

7. Ibid., pp. 139-41, for an analysis of Sterling’s signaling theory. 


8. Elsewhere {Big Story, 1 , 159), the same quote is attributed to Frank McGee. 

9. Douglas Kinnard, The War Managers (Hanover, N.H.: University Press of 
New England, 1977), pp. 75,47. In fact, the “body count” was unknown, since 
much of the air and artillery barrage was directed against targets where casual¬ 
ties could never be counted or even guessed at, as Kinnard and many other 
sources confirm. Westmoreland’s subsequent writings show that reporters 
would have been quite justified to treat his reports with skepticism. See George 
M. Kahin, Intervention: How America Became Involved in Vietnam (New York: 
Knopf, 1986), p. 536, on his falsification of the record concerning the suppres¬ 
sion of the Buddhist movement in Danang and Hue in 1966. 

10. For evidence from the Pentagon Papers, see Noam Chomsky, For Reasons 
of State (New York: Pantheon, 1973), pp. 86ff. 


Appendix 3 

1. Pentagon Papers, Senator Gravel edition (Boston: Beacon Press, 1972), IV, 
548-49; see p. 225, above. As to what Schakne actually said, we cannot be sure, 
since Braestrup presents only a few scattered phrases embedded in his own 
