format—good Martella, Agca the betrayer of the case, the Soviet motive, 
Agca’s visit to Bulgaria, and his knowledge of details. All other materials are 
designated “sinister” or blacked out to enhance the credibility of the party line. 


Agca Helped the Bulgarians 

Tagliabue closes his article with a quote from Agca’s attorney that the Bulgari¬ 
ans “should be thankful” to Agca. This reiterates one of Tagliabue’s preferred 
themes—that Agca deliberately blew the case. This is derived from Sterling’s 
theory that Agca’s vacillations were really “signals” to the Bulgarians, alter¬ 
nately threatening and rewarding them, but aiming at getting them to help him 
out of jail. In his earlier articles Tagliabue followed this line, and it is implicit 
in this summing-up article, although it is a wholly unproven Sterling gimmick. 7 
What was Agca bargaining for in the trial? Did he expect the Bulgarians to 
spring him? To admit their own involvement in the case by arranging a deal 
for his release? And if he was sabotaging the case in order to win favor with 
the Bulgarians, and since the Bulgarians obviously refused to respond, why did 
he not finally decide to do them injury? Tagliabue never addresses these points. 

In sum, this is a model case of propaganda under the guise of “news” or 
“news analysis.” In this instance there are a number of lies, but these are less 
important than the other systematic distortions. Tagliabue and the Times 
frame the issue in terms of probable Bulgarian guilt and the factors that caused 
the case to be lost—exclusive of those suggesting that there was no case to 
begin with. They refuse to discuss the failure to obtain confirmation of any 
factual claims of meetings or deals with Bulgarians. They fail to discuss—or 
even to mention—problems of plausible deniability. They reiterate the ele¬ 
ments of the preferred SHK model without noting the illogic or the incompati¬ 
ble facts. They ignore evidence that would support the coaching model. They 
use invidious language only for the disfavored line of argument and spokesper¬ 
sons, manipulating words and bending evidence to the desired end. This article 
should be perfect for classroom use in courses on propaganda, media bias, and 
related subjects. 


“The More Sinister View” 


In a single, late paragraph devoted to the possibility of coaching, Tagliabue 
merely asserts it as a claim, without providing a single supportive point of 
evidence, although there are many. 6 He uses a double propagandist’s put- 
down—ironically designating the coaching hypothesis as “the more sinister 
view,” and stating that it is “espoused by critics of the case on the political 
left, including Soviet bloc governments.” Even Tagliabue, in his earlier news 








Appendix 3 


BRAESTRUP’S BIG STORY : 

Some “Freedom House Exclusives” 

In “The Tet offensive” (p. 211), we considered the example that has regularly 
been put forth to substantiate the charge that the media adopt an “adversarial 
stance” with regard to established power—coverage of the Tet offensive—and 
the Freedom House study on which this charge is based. As we saw, in this 
case too the behavior of the media conforms to the expectations of the propa¬ 
ganda model, and the major theses advanced in the Freedom House study are 
refuted even by their own evidence. What remains of their charge is the 
possibility that media coverage of the Tet offensive was technically incompe¬ 
tent, although subordinated to elite requirements. Turning to a closer exami¬ 
nation of this charge, we find that the shoe is on the other foot: when “Freedom 
House exclusives” are corrected, the performance of the media appears quite 
creditable, while the incompetence of the Freedom House study is seen to 
transcend even the level already demonstrated. That this study has been taken 
seriously, and permitted to set much of the agenda for subsequent discussion, 
is a most intriguing fact. 

According to Freedom House, television commentary and Newsweek are the 




worst offenders in this ‘‘extreme case” of journalistic incompetence, so let us 
begin by reviewing some of their sins. One example to which Braestrup reverts 
several times is Walter Cronkite’s “much publicized half-hour CBS ‘special 5 
on the war 55 on February 27 {Big Story, I, 158). According to Braestrup, 
Cronkite 5 s “assessment” here is “that U.S. troops would have to garrison the 
countryside” (I, 645). In his foreword, Leonard Sussman properly observes 
that “We do not expect the reader to accept on faith our various analyses or 
judgments,” and so “the complete texts of many of the reports discussed 55 are 
presented, primarily in volume II (I, x). Following his advice, we turn to 
volume II, where we find the complete text of Cronkite’s “special 55 (i8off.). 
There is not even a remote hint of the “assessment 55 that Braestrup attributes 
to him. 

In this important “special, 55 Braestrup claims, “In effect, Cronkite seemed 
to say, the ruins, the refugees, the disruption of pacification that came at Tet 
added up to a defeat for the allies that would force President Johnson to the 
negotiating table 55 ( 1 ,158). Cronkite says nothing of the kind. He reports that 
“there are doubts about the measure of success or setback, 55 noting accurately 
that “the experts do not agree on the objectives or on the amount of success 
