
Braestrup claims to have shown that the reporting of the Tet offen¬ 
sive is “an extreme case” of the “unsatisfactory” performance of the 
media: “Rarely has contemporary crisis-journalism turned out, in retro¬ 
spect, to have veered so widely from reality” by presenting “a portrait 
of defeat for the allies”—“allies” being the term regularly used to refer 
to the U.S. invaders, the local forces they organized, and the largely 
mercenary forces they introduced to support U.S. military operations 
in Indochina, and a term chosen to exploit the favorable connotations 
provided by World War II, when “the allies” fought “the Axis.” “To 
have portrayed such a setback for one side [them] as a defeat for the 
other [us]—in a major crisis abroad—cannot be counted as a triumph 
for American journalism,” which “shouted that the patient was dying, 
then weeks later began to whisper that he somehow seemed to be 
recovering—whispers apparently not heard amid the clamorous domes¬ 
tic reaction to the initial shouts,” with television the worst offender. 
The whispers began “about late February,” he asserts. These journalis¬ 
tic failures, Braestrup concludes, reflect “the more volatile journalistic 
style—spurred by managerial exhortation or complaisance—that has 
become so popular since the late 1960s,” accompanied with “an often 
mindless readiness to seek out conflict, to believe the worst of the 
government or of authority in general, and on that basis to divide up 
the actors on any issue into the ‘good’ and the ‘bad.’ ” The “bad actors” 
include the U.S. forces in Vietnam, the “military-industrial complex,” 
and the CIA, among others, while “the good” in the eyes of the media 
are presumably the Communists, who, Braestrup argues sardonically 
throughout, were consistently overpraised and protected. The prospect, 
he foresees, “is for a continuation of the current volatile styles, always 
with the dark possibility that, if the managers do not themselves take 
action, then outsiders—the courts, the Federal Communications Com¬ 
mission, or Congress—will seek to apply remedies of their own,” a 
proposal taken up in Roche’s call for a congressional inquiry and the 
subsequent warnings of the Trilateral Commission, cited earlier (Big 
Story, I, 7°5ff-) 

The Braestrup-Freedom House thesis has two essential components: 
(1) coverage of the Tet offensive illustrates media incompetence and 
their “adversarial stance’’; (2) by their portrayal of an American victory 
as a defeat, the media bear responsibility for the loss of American 
resolve and the subsequent American defeat in Vietnam* It is the sec- 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (i): VIETNAM 213 


ond component of the thesis that carries the dramatic impact* and that 
has permitted it to set much of the agenda for subsequent discussion 
of the fourth estate and the dangers that its new-found power and 
“sixties 5 style” of “mindless 55 hatred of authority pose for the very 
survival of free institutions and democracy. 

The first component of the thesis is commonly accepted even by 
those who deny the second. Thus* rejecting “the stab-in-the-back the¬ 
sis*” George Herring nevertheless observes: “That the media was hos¬ 
tile to the war and to Johnson seems clear, and much of the reporting 
of Tet was misleading”* these “distortions of the media” may have 
contributed to “growing popular discontent 55 with the war and “public 
anxiety,” Herring adds* but these were not the operative factors in 
Johnson's decision to de-escalate and seek negotiations after Tet. 107 

An analysis of the facts and the argument demonstrates that neither 
component of the Freedom House thesis is tenable. The second* as we 
shall see, is conceded in the Freedom House study to be false with 
regard to public opinion, and the straw at which they then grasp will 
plainly not bear the weight. As for the first component* on the narrow 
question of professional competence in reporting the facts available 
under trying and confused circumstances, the performance of the 
media was acceptable if not outstanding, and compares quite favorably 
to the internal reporting of the American military authorities and U.S. 
intelligence* insofar as these are available. But when we turn to broader 
questions of the sort discussed earlier—that is* if we evaluate the media 
by the standards that we would properly apply to reporting, say, on the 
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan—we see that indeed they can be faulted 
in precisely the terms anticipated by the propaganda model. The very 
example selected as providing the strongest grounds for their accusa¬ 
tions by Freedom House and other critics from the jingoist right wing 
of the political spectrum actually happens to demonstrate the precise 
opposite of what is alleged—namely, it provides yet another striking 
illustration of the subservience of the media to the state propaganda 
system. 108 

The Freedom House study itself provides ample documentation to 
establish these conclusions* and to refute its own specific allegations 
point by point. Given the major role that this study and the thesis it 
allegedly established has played in recent ideology, we will give some 
attention to the chasm that lies between its interpretation and summar¬ 
ies* on the one hand, and the documentary record that it (in part) 
presents, on the other. 109 The comments and summaries often seriously 
misrepresent the contents of the documents described or are outright 
falsifications. The analysis, laced with bitter sarcasm throughout, is 



214 BAAMUFACTUfcIHG CONSENT 


thoroughly undermined when compared with the actual documents* 
When the countless errors and careless and inaccurate comments are 
corrected, nothing remains of the Freedom House case. The sardonic 
