Illicit Association,” “state terrorism,” “death squad,” “massacre,” “torture,” 
“forced relocations,” “civil-defense patrols,” “freedom of the press,” or “vot¬ 
ing requirement.” None of the observers doubted the authenticity of “posi¬ 
tive” responses by Guatemalan peasants to questions by non-Spanish-speaking 
foreigners flown in by helicopter in a country subject to military occupation. 
All of the observers felt quite capable of assessing the true feelings of the 
Guatemalan people on the basis of long lines, facial expressions, and a handful 
of responses to visitors under official protection. There was no dissent among 
the observers from the conclusion that the election was fair, inspiring, a 
testimonial to the eagerness of the Guatemalan people to participate and 
express their patriotic sentiments, and a first step toward democracy. No 
demonstration-election cliche was omitted—history was blacked out, and no 
basic condition of a free election was examined by the observers. 

Let us sample a few of the cliches offered by these Guatemalan election 
observers: 

1. People full of hope—very positive start. This was a “dynamic begin¬ 
ning, ... a first step,” according to delegation head Ralph Regula. Father 
Kenneth Baker found a “great sense of hope for the future ... the spirit of 
hopefulness.” Jack Brier also observed “a spirit of hopefulness about the 
future, but not necessarily confidence in whatever actions may come about as 
a result of the elections.” (This is a very nuanced distinction that Brier was 
able to make on the basis of translated brief answers by a few voters.) Tom 
Kahn claimed that “many of the workers whom we spoke to on the voting lines 
told us that they had great hope, that this was a first step.” Kahn was asked 
during the press conference whether he had visited any of the embattled 
Coca-Cola workers. He hadn’t. Neither Kahn nor his AIFLD colleague, Jesse 
Friedman, mentioned the enormous decline in union membership or the deci¬ 
mation of union leadership by murder. 

2. Long lines, patient voters. The observers were deeply impressed with 
“the way the people patiently waited” to vote (Regula). Howard Penniman 
noted “the extraordinary patience of the people voting.” Ed Simcox pointed 
out that the voters “did go out, they formed lines very early in the morning, 
they waited in some instances two, three, four hours to go up and vote.” 
According to Congressman Hightower, “The thing that impressed us instantly 
was the long lines.” Tom Kahn was impressed with the “calm and order which 
prevailed around the voting tables.” 

Long lines and patient voters are quite compatible with voting by a terror¬ 
ized population desiring mainly to survive. The official observers, who never 
once mention the record of spectacular state terror in Guatemala, merely 
postulate that voters who get in line and wait patiently do so for reasons that 
are benign. 

3 . The patriotic imperative . The main theme of this observer team is that 
the voters are eager to vote as good patriots, loyal to the militarized terrorist 


state that Ronald Reagan and the State Department find acceptable. Max 
Singer says that “I did sense that Guatemalans feel that voting is important 
to them.” (This is correct, but Singer was not contemplating the possibility that 
its importance to them might lie in fear and a desire to avoid retribution by 
the omnipresent army.) Regula said that the people were patiently waiting “for 
an opportunity to share in the process of choosing the constituent assembly.” 
According to Simcox, “They know that this was the patriotic thing to do, that 
this was important for their country.” Tom Kahn found that the people he 
talked to in voting lines “expressed a great sense of national pride.” 

4. Absence of any sign of coercion. Father Kenneth Baker stated that 
“there seemed to be a general atmosphere of no intimidation.” Baker didn’t 
say how he sensed this atmosphere, and whether it was assuredly reliable in 
a foreign country observed for a day under military guard. Baker referred to 
the bishops having urged people to vote, but he failed to note their extended 
observations suggesting that a meaningful election couldn’t be held in an 
environment of disappearances, terror, and catastrophic socioeconomic condi¬ 
tions. Jack Brier saw “absolutely no violence. I saw no evidence of direct 
military involvement.” A problem that Brier doesn’t discuss is that if pacifica¬ 
tion is thorough, no violence or substantial military presence will be necessary 
to confirm military choices. There is absolutely no violence or evidence of 
direct military involvement in elections in the Soviet Union. Brier plays dumb, 
pretending that violence on election day is really relevant, and ignoring the 
long-term violence that strips away institutional protections and produces a 
terrorized population. 2 Congressman Mickey Edwards did find a military pres¬ 
ence in Guatemala, but it was not “oppressive”: “We did not find anything to 
indicate that the people in those areas were under any pressure or intimida¬ 
tion,” How hard Edwards looked must remain in doubt. 3 

5 . Amazing turnout. Jack Brier referred to the “surprisingly large turnout,” 
and Ed Simcox found the 60-70 percent turnout “really an incredibly positive 
statistic.” Even the U.S. embassy noted that voting in Guatemala is compul¬ 
sory (although it tried to discount this by citing a Guatemalan official who said 
that the law was only rarely enforced). The official observers, however, never 
mentioned this small matter of a legal requirement, or the need to get an ID 
card stamped, let alone the army warnings and the background of mass killings 
and disappearances. 

6. Human rights improving. Congressman Mickey Edwards found that 
“by all objective observations, the human-rights record in this country has 
improved tremendously over the last two or three years.” He does not say what 
objective observations he is referring to. Max Singer also found that “the 
human-rights record is improving in Guatemala, as near as I can tell,” partly 
because the guerrilla movement has weakened, and that movement has been 
a serious threat to the human rights of the Guatemalan people. Singer was 
asked in the press conference how he determined this improvement. His 
answer was “From the statements of people living in the countryside.” 

1. Reason for the blank and spoiled votes. Some 26 percent of the ballots 
cast in the Guatemalan election, far exceeding the total for any party, were 
