shows that it was a just “defense of South Vietnam” against northern 
aggressors. In the cities, swollen with millions of refugees, the lucky and 
the more corrupt survived on an American dole at a level that had no 
relation to the now-demolished productive capacity of the country, 
leaving another near-insoluble problem that can conveniently be 
blamed on the Communists. The revolutionary forces had gained vic¬ 
tory in many rural areas by the time of the outright U.S* invasion. 






THE INDOCHINA WARS (i): VIETNAM 247 


largely through their appeal to the peasantry* as documented in the 
more serious scholarly work from sources in or close to the U.S. gov¬ 
ernment (“The Early Stages*” p, 186). But “many of the conclusions [of 
this work] have been invalidated by the events after Tet,” New York 
Times Asia correspondent Fox Butterfield observes* a coy reference to 
the fact that this political success was overturned by the U.S. outburst 
of savagery in the post-Tet mass murder operations. 183 

That the United States suffered a “defeat” in Indochina is a natural 
perception on the part of those of limitless ambition* who understand 
“defeat” to mean the achievement only of major goals* while certain 
minor ones remain beyond our grasp. The perception of an unqualified 
U.S. “defeat” in the media retrospectives and similar commentary is 
understandable in part in these terms* in part in terms of the alleged 
goal of “defending freedom” developed in official propaganda and 
relayed by the ideological institutions. 

Postwar U.S. policy has been designed to ensure that the victory is 
maintained by maximizing suffering and oppression in Indochina, 
which then evokes further gloating here. Since “the destruction is 
mutual*” as is readily demonstrated by a stroll through New York* 
Boston, Vinh, Quang Ngai Province* and the Plain of Jars* we are 
entitled to deny reparations* aid* and trade, and to block development 
funds. The extent of U.S. sadism is noteworthy, as is the (null) reaction 
to it. In 1977* when India tried to send a hundred buffalo to Vietnam 
ro replenish the herds destroyed by U.S. violence, the United States 
threatened to cancel “food-for-peace” aid, while the press featured 
photographs of peasants in Cambodia pulling plows as proof of Com¬ 
munist barbarity; the photographs in this case were probable fabrica¬ 
tions of Thai intelligence* but authentic ones could* no doubt* have 
been obtained throughout Indochina. The Carter administration even 
denied rice to Laos (despite a cynical pretense to the contrary), where 
the agricultural system was destroyed by U.S. terror bombing. Oxfam 
America was not permitted to send ten solar pumps to Cambodia for 
