missed his golden opportunity” by bad tactics. Newsweek ’s picture of “a foe 
without setbacks or flaws” is another Freedom House exclusive. 

What of the other sins? As for the reference to the “wily” Giap, compare 
Newsweek with what Braestrup regards as the outstanding analysis by Douglas 
Pike, who describes Giap as a “master tactician,” “one of the best tactical 
commanders of the 20th century,” etc. (I, i96f.). On the “toughness” of the 
North Vietnamese and their “ominous” activity, see the regular reports of the 
U.S. military command, and an extensive literature by Vietnam veterans. 

Braestrup claims that “one searches in vain through most of the media 
descriptions of the foe, even well into March 1968, for indications that the 
enemy’s planning, tactics, execution, zeal, and weaponry were less than flaw¬ 
less”; “there were few hints in Times analyses or battlefield reporting that the 
foe was anything but shrewd, tenacious, ascetic, infallible and menacing, and 
in this case the paper had plenty of company” (I, 186, 216). Apart from 
“flawless” and “infallible,” further Freedom House exclusives, the adjectives 
can be taken from the military reports and seem unexceptionable. The claim 
that the media regarded the enemy as infallible is defended through pages 186 
to 231, along with typical Freedom House self-refutation: example after exam¬ 
ple to the contrary is cited, in addition to those just mentioned. The media 
reported that the VC “undoubtedly” alienated the population, as they caused 
“indiscriminate slaughter” and “totally misjudged the mood of the South 
Vietnamese.” They may be suffering “a severe manpower problem” and “hurt¬ 
ing badly.” 6 They “failed to achieve their main objectives.” Captured VC got 
lost in Saigon and were falsely told that they would be welcomed. (This 
appears under Braestrup’s heading “Television: in praise of the VC.”) They 
did not “get—or heed” important information. And so on. All in all, hardly 
the picture of an “infallible” and “flawless” enemy. 

Note also the Freedom House assumption that a free press, militantly 
guarding its objectivity, should not only consider those who are resisting the 
U.S. attack as “the enemy,” “the foe,” etc., but must also refrain from accu¬ 
rately describing “the enemy” as tough, resolute, and courageous. To play its 
proper role in a free society by Freedom House standards, the media should 
never veer a moment from the kind of service to the state demanded and 
secured by force in totalitarian states, so it appears. 

The impact of the Freedom House study comes from the impression of 
massive documentation and the huge resources that were employed to obtain 
and analyze it. Case by case, the examples collapse on inspection. Here are a 
few more examples, far from exhaustive. 7 

On pacification, “TV and radio commentators went far beyond the available 
information to imply the dramatic worst.” Three examples are cited to prove 
the point ( 1 ,565). Howard Tuckner, of NBC-TV, reported from New York the 
views of “U.S. intelligence officials” and “Some U.S. officials in Vietnam”— 
correctly, as Braestrup concedes in a footnote, adding that these were the views 
of “CIA in Washington” and “Disheartened junior CORDS officials in Viet¬ 
nam.” By Freedom House standards, it is improper to cite such sources accu¬ 
rately. The second example is a CBS radio report criticized only for being 


“depressed”—as were pacification officials on the ground. The third example 
is from an NBC-TV “special,” in which Dean Brelis says that we don’t know 
what is happening in the rural areas but “can only imagine,” and that “the 
cities are no longer secure; perhaps they never were.” 8 Hardly remarkable, and 
far from the fevered conclusion drawn in Braestrup’s paraphrase. 

Examples of what Braestrup calls “straw man journalism” abound in his 
own presentation. Thus he faults the media for claiming that the pacification 
program had been destroyed, whereas his own conclusion is that “pacification, 
although hit hard, was not ‘dead’... it was a mixed picture, but clearly neither 
a military nor a psychological ‘disaster’ ” ( 1 ,716). The media regularly reported 
that pacification was hit hard, not dead, as his own evidence clearly shows—in 
contrast to the Pentagon, which took a more pessimistic view, as we shall see 
directly. Braestrup’s “straw man journalism” may impress careless readers 
cifinuning the text for dramatic conclusions, but it presents no evidence and 
amounts to no argument. 

Braestrup refers sarcastically to “insights into Vietnamese psychology,” as 
when Morley Safer, watching marines burning down huts in Cam Ne, con¬ 
cluded that a peasant whose home was destroyed would find it hard to believe 
“that we are on his side” (I, 43). How does Safer know? Perhaps the peasant 
enjoyed watching the flames. Not all such “psychoanalyzing” is derided, how¬ 
ever, as when General Westmoreland explains that “the people in the cities 
are largely indignant at the Vietcong for violating the sanctity of the Tet period 
and for their tactics which brought about damage to the cities” (II, 164), or 
when he expounds on the peasant “state of mind” (I, 78). Note that Safer is 
not criticized for accepting the tacit assumption that the press is an agency of 
the invading army (“we are on his side”). 

Braestrup states that “the embassy fight became the whole Tet offensive on 
TV and in the newspapers during that offensive’s second day” (his emphasis; 
1,126); this illustration of the incompetence of the media is thoroughly refuted 
by his story index. He also claims that the media exaggerated VC success in 
the early confusion by claiming that the embassy had been entered—failing, 
however, to compare these accounts with the reports by military police that 
they were taking fire from inside the embassy, or the message log of the 716th 
MP Battalion, which reads: “General Westmoreland calls; orders first priority 
effort to recapture U.S. Embassy” ( 1 ,92; our emphasis). It is intriguing to read 
Braestrup’s outrage over quite accurate press reporting of what was said by 
Westmoreland, military police involved in the fight, and others, and in particu¬ 
lar over the fact that the press did not simply rely on Westmoreland’s later 
account (his apparent belief that the embassy had been “captured” goes be¬ 
yond any reporter’s error that Braestrup cites). A careful reading shows that 
media reports were surprisingly accurate, given the confusion of the moment, 
although one cannot fault Braestrup’s profound conclusion that “first reports 
are always partly wrong,” which will come as a startling insight to the working 
journalist. 
