ture,” As we repeatedly stressed, in this chapter of a two-volume study 
on U.S. policy and ideology, our concern remained the United States, 
not Indochina; our purpose was not to “establish the facts with regard to 
postwar Indochina” on the basis of the evidence available, but rather to 
examine the constructions developed on the basis of this evidence, 
to analyze the way this evidence was refracted “through the prism of 
Western ideology, a very different task.” 78 The conclusions drawn there 




282 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


remain valid. To our knowledge, no error or even misleading statement 
or omission has been found. 79 

This review of an impressive propaganda exercise aroused great 
outrage—not at all surprisingly: the response within Soviet domains is 
similar, as are the reasons, when dissidents expose propaganda fabrica¬ 
tions with regard to the United States, Israel, and other official enemies. 
Indignant commentators depicted us as “apologists for Khmer Rouge 
crimes” 80 —in a study that denounced Khmer Rouge atrocities (a fact 
always suppressed) and then proceeded to demonstrate the remarkable 
character of Western propaganda, our topic throughout the two-vol¬ 
ume study in which this chapter appeared. There was also a new wave 
of falsification, often unanswerable when journals refused to permit 
response. We will not review these further propaganda exercises here, 
but merely note that they provide an intriguing expression of what, in 
other contexts, is described as the totalitarian mentality: it is not enough 
to denounce official enemies; it is also necessary to guard with vigilance 
the right to lie in the service of power. The reaction to our challenge 
to this sacred right again fits neatly within the expectations of a propa¬ 
ganda model, standing alongside the Freedom House attack on the 
media for failure to serve state policy with sufficient vigor and opti¬ 
mism. 

By early 1977, denunciations of the Khmer Rouge for having caused 
unprecedented “murder in a gentle land” and “autogenocide” extended 
from mass circulation journals such as Reader's Digest (with tens of 
millions of readers) and TV Guide (circulation nineteen million), to the 
New York Review of Books and the media generally, in addition to a 
best-selling book by John Barron and Anthony Paul based on their 
Reader’s Digest article and the widely misquoted study by Francois 
Ponchaud mentioned earlier. Similar material continued to flow in 
abundance in the press and newsweeklies, the New York Times Maga¬ 
zine and elsewhere. Evidence about the 1977-78 period became availa¬ 
ble primarily after the Vietnamese expulsion of the Khmer Rouge 
regime, which brought phase II of the genocide to a close, eliciting new 
outrage over the alleged “genocide” brought about by the “Prussians 
of Asia.” 

The picture created by this chorus of denunciation, from the first 
days of Democratic Kampuchea (DK) in 1975, is described sardonically 
by Michael Vickery as “the standard total view” (STV), According to 
the STV, prior to the Khmer Rouge victory in April 1975, Cambodia 
had been a “gentle land” (Barron and Paul) of “gentle if emotional 
people” who “wanted only to live in peace in their lush kingdom” (Jack 
Anderson), a land in which hunger was “almost unknown” (Henry 



THE INDOCHINA WARS ( 11 ): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 283 


Kamm). But in 1975, the “formerly fun-loving, easy-going Cambodi¬ 
ans” were subjected to the “harsh regime” of the Khmer Rouge, who 
ordered that all those not under their rule before the victory can be 
“disposed of” because they are “no longer required,” even if only one 
million Khmers remain (Donald Wise, citing several of the frequently 
quoted Khmer Rouge statements that were conceded to be fabrica¬ 
tions), 81 

According to the STV, during the pre-1977 period on which the 
conclusions were based, the Khmer Rouge leadership was engaged in 
a policy of systematic extermination and destruction of all organized 
social and cultural life apart from the Gulag run by the “nine men at 
the top,” Paris-trained Communists, without local variation and with 
no cause other than inexplicable sadism and Marxist-Leninist dogma. 
By early 1977, it was alleged that they had “boasted” of having slaugh¬ 
tered some two million people (Jean Lacouture in the New York Re¬ 
view). This figure remained the standard even after Lacouture 
withdrew it a few weeks later, acknowledging that he had misread his 
source (Ponchaud) and that the actual figure might be in the thousands, 
but adding that he saw little significance to a difference between thou¬ 
sands killed and a “boast” of two million killed. This position expresses 
with some clarity the general attitude toward fact during this period and 
since, as does his further statement that it is hardly important to deter¬ 
mine “exactly which person uttered an inhuman phrase”—the case in 
question had to do with inhuman phrases he attributed to Khmer 
Rouge officials but which turned out to be mistranslations of phrases 
that had been fabricated outright by his source (Ponchaud) or that had 
appeared not in a Cambodian journal, as he asserted, but in a Thai 
journal mistranslated by Ponchaud that expressed virtually the oppo¬ 
site of what was claimed. The two-million figure was later upgraded to 
three million or more, often citing Vietnamese wartime propaganda. 
The examples are quite typical. 

Not everyone joined in the chorus. The most striking exceptions 
were those who had the best access to information from Cambodia, 
