opposition. As with Time, the voters are “philosophical,” “enthusiasm 
for the election was not universal,” and “there was little visible enthusi¬ 
asm,” Kinzer did not compare the electoral modalities* range of op¬ 
tions* or other basic conditions in Nicaragua and Guatemala (or El 
Salvador), In short, he discussed different questions in his news report¬ 
ing on the elections in Nicaragua and Guatemala* adhering closely to 
the propaganda frame, 92 

On the alleged negativism and apathy, both the Irish and LASA 
delegations noted that voting was not required in Nicaragua and was 
entirely secret. Therefore* as the Irish delegation pointed out, the low 
rate of abstention is more meaningful and “invalidates predictions that 
large sectors of the population were opposed to the election. Further¬ 
more, the percentage of spoiled votes (7.4 percent) is comparable to any 
European election in a country with a highly literate population” (p, 
7), They also note that 

Speaking with one old man, awaiting his turn to vote in a rural 
polling station* one member of the delegation inquired: “What 
difference do you see between this and any other election in which 
you voted?” He replied: “Everything.” “In what way?” He simply 
shrugged: “Everything is different.” 

The U.S. media never located anybody like this old man. The Irish 
delegation also pointed out that 

Some observers from other countries suggested that the people 
did not appear enthusiastic as they went to the polls. This is not 
surprising as people stood in long queues waiting patiently their 
turn to go behind the curtain to mark their ballot paper. One 
member of the delegation who had the opportunity to observe 
voters in the American election just two days later* noted no 
greater enthusiasm for standing in queues there! 




120 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


It is our belief that the invariable enthusiasm and optimism found by 
the U*S. mass media in client-state elections* and the apathy and nega¬ 
tivism found in elections in states disfavored by the U*S* administra¬ 
tion, has nothing to do with electoral realities and must be explained 
entirely by an imposed propaganda agenda and the filtering out of 
contrary opinion and information* 


3.6*2* Ignoring the superior 
quality of the Nicaraguan 
