
30. This Sterling theme and the ends sought by these conferees also reflected 
an elite consensus in the United States; otherwise the mass media would not 
have accepted her views so readily. 

31. See Herman and Brodhead, Bulgarian Connection, chapter 6, “The Disin- 
formationists.” 

32. In a characteristic lie, Sterling says in her Terror Network ([New York: 


NOTES TO PAGES 159-161 367 


Holt, Rinehart & Winston/Reader’s Digest Press, 1984], p. 290) that Sejna got 
out of Czechoslovakia “a jump ahead of the invading Soviet army,” when in 
fact Sejna defected in the middle of the Czech Spring, long before the Soviet 
invasion, and in the midst of a corruption scandal in which Sejna was a 
principal. See Leslie Gelb, “Soviet-Terror Ties Called Outdated,” New York 
Times, October 18, 1981. In his book Veil, Bob Woodward notes that CIA 
analysts had at once dismissed Sterling’s concoctions as “preposterous,” giving 
some examples, including her reliance on Italian press stories that had been 
planted in CIA disinformation operations ([New York: Simon & Schuster, 
i 987], pp. 124-29). For detailed refutation, see Edward S. Herman, The Real 
Terror Network (Boston: South End Press, 1982). 

33. Sejna, of course, failed this test by “recognizing” the forged document, 
which had slipped his mind, and used it in later years for its spectacular 
disclosures. See Lars-Erik Nelson, “The Deep Terror Plot: A Thickening of 
Silence,” New York Daily News, June 24,1984; Alexander Cockburn, “Beat the 
Devil,” The Nation, August 17-24,1985. Sterling was introduced to this Sejna 
information windfall by Michael Ledeen. (see Sterling, Terror Network p. 34). 

34. See also “Why Is the West Covering Up for Agca? An Exclusive Interview 
with Claire Sterling,” Human Events, April 21, 1984. 

35. This quotation and line of thought was presented by Sterling in her speech 
given at the Conference on Disinformation, in Paris, December 5,1984, spon¬ 
sored by Internationale de la Resistance, a coalition of right-wing resistance/ 
“liberation” organizations and support groups. We quote from page 2 of the 
copy of her speech distributed by the sponsor organization. The booklet by 
Andronov to which she attributes such great influence was, to our knowledge, 
never mentioned in the U.S. mass media except by Sterling and Henze. 

36. Even Michael Dobbs failed to deal with the fact that the Bulgarian defense 
claimed that no publicly available sources—i.e., newspapers, or radio and 
television programs—had ever had details on Antonov’s apartment before Agca 
provided those details to the investigating magistrate. This would seem to 
imply that Agca got the details by some form of coaching while in prison. 
Dobbs dismisses coaching as the “Bulgarian view,” but never explains what 
