ceeded in decimating the indigenous resistance, U.S. sources reported 
about eight hundred North Vietnamese “against an estimated total of 
49,000 Vietcong soldiers and support troops” in the entire Mekong 
Delta. 59 

This picture and what it entails was essentially invisible to the 
American public, and it is so remote from news coverage that sampling 
of the record is beside the point. The same remains true today outside 
of the specialist and dissident literature. 

The context of McNamara’s observation cited earlier on the crucial 
U.S. role in blocking the election and unification provisions after Ge¬ 
neva was the “growth of antiwar and neutralist sentiment in the Saigon- 
controlled areas 55 in 1964. This came at a time when virtually all 
Vietnamese factions, along with international opinion generally, were 
seeking a political solution among Vietnamese that would head offthe 
impending war to which the United States was committed because of 
its recognition that it had no political base in South Vietnam. 60 

The United States overturned the Diem regime in 1963 because of 
its ineptitude in conducting the war, as welt as because of fears that it 
was moving toward a negotiated settlement with the NLF. There were 
few illusions about popular support for the U.S. efforts to maintain and 
extend the military struggle. As for the generals, who are “all we have 
got, 55 as Ambassador Lodge recognized in January 1964, U.S. policy¬ 
makers knew little about them. William Bundy, soon to become assist¬ 
ant secretary of state for Far Eastern affairs, later commented that 
“Actually no one on our side knew what the new people were thinking 
at all. , , , Our requirements were really very simple—we wanted any 
government which would continue to fight.” The generals, however, 
did not want to continue to fight. Rather, along with the prime minister 
installed as a civilian cover for the military regime, they “wanted to 
move as rapidly as possible towards transferring the struggle for power 
in the South from the military to the political level, 55 leading to “a 
negotiated agreement among the Vietnamese parties themselves, with- 



190 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


out American intervention.” They saw the NLF “as preponderantly 
noncommunist in membership” and largely independent of Hanoi’s 
control* and regarded a political settlement among South Vietnamese 
as feasible in essential agreement with the official NLF program, 61 

But none of this was acceptable to the United States* President 
Johnson explained to Ambassador Lodge that his mission was “knock¬ 
ing down the idea of neutralization wherever it rears its ugly head,” 
because neutralism, as Ambassador Maxwell Taylor observed, “ap¬ 
