Tagliabue points out that although the trial was supposed merely to verify the 


findings of the preliminary investigation, in fact the prosecution did a great 
deal of new investigative work. This suggests that the trial court may have 
found Martella’s investigation sadly lacking, but Tagliabue never addresses the 
point. 


Agca’s Desertion of the Case 

An important part of the apologetic framework is the claim that Agca, who had 
presented an allegedly coherent version of a connection up to the trial, sud¬ 
denly did an about face and refused to testify altogether. Tagliabue devotes 
several paragraphs to this theme, eventually suggesting that Agca’s increas¬ 
ingly erratic behavior “may have been designed to torpedo the efforts of the 
court.” He suggests that the prosecutor couldn’t overcome this difficulty, so 
that the loss of the case is lodged in Agca’s behavior rather than in any inherent 
deficiencies in the prosecution’s case. 

In reality, Agca’s claims emerged very slowly and contradictorily, with 
dozens of retractions that, taken together, are best explained by coaching, 
outside information, and guesses by Agca as to what Martella and the press 
would like to hear. There is no reason to believe that Agca ever offered or 
settled upon a coherent version of a Bulgarian connection. On the contrary, 
it appears that his version changed continually, and that the final result in 
Martella’s report was Martella’s own arbitrary synthesis. 4 

The claim that Agca became more erratic during the trial is also not based 
on evidence. Agca’s persistently erratic behavior was obscured by the secrecy 
of his earlier testimony, but it is clear from the Martella report that he was 
already claiming to be Jesus and displaying other symptoms of irrationality. 
Furthermore, Tagliabue’s statement that Agca refused to cooperate during the 
trial is false—Agca periodically withdrew from the proceedings when his 
testimony became too incoherent, but he always returned to the stand, and he 
answered a vast number of questions. One hypothesis that Tagliabue never 
entertains is that if Agca’s claims were based on coaching and/or imagination, 
in an open court he would be vulnerable and quickly pushed to the wall. 

Tagliabue also never asks this further question: Even if Agca had clammed 
up (which was not true), given the extensive Martella investigation and report, 
why would the court not be able to follow the already established leads to a 
successful outcome? Why was not a single witness produced to confirm Agca’s 
allegations of numerous meetings and trips with Bulgarians in Rome? Why was 
the car allegedly rented by the Bulgarians never found? Where is the money 
supposedly given to Agca? Tagliabue fails to address these questions. 


“Partial Confirmation” of Agca’s 

Tale 

Tagliabue describes some alleged partial confirmations of Agca’s claims. The 
first is that “Mr. Ozbey said the Bulgarians had indeed wanted to use Mr. Agca 



to shoot the Pope, but did not trust him.” But this is not a partial confirmation 
if the net result was that the Bulgarians failed to hire Agca. Furthermore, 
another reporter present when Ozbey testified in Rome claims that Ozbey did 
not tell the court that the Bulgarians “wanted to use” Agca. According to 
Wolfgang Achtner, of ABC-TV News, in Rome, the only thing Ozbey said was 
that the Bulgarians “listened with interest, but behaved with indifference” (the 
translation by the Turkish interpreter in court), or “listened with interest but 
didn’t take it seriously” (Achtner’s own translation). In short, it would appear 
that Tagliabue has doctored the evidence. 

The other “partial confirmation” is that “Catli hinted at obscure secret 
service contacts with West German intelligence, and of payments for unspeci¬ 
fied purposes to Turks involved in the investigations.” This vague statement 
does not even mention the plot against the pope and is partial confirmation 
of nothing. The most important Catli evidence bearing on this point was his 
description of the attempt by the West German police to bribe Agca’s supposed 
co-conspirator Oral Celik to come to West Germany and confirm Agca’s 
claims. This supports the coaching hypothesis: accordingly, Tagliabue blacks 
it out. The only other testimony by Catli mentioning the secret services in¬ 
volved Gray Wolves leader Ali Batman, who told Catli he had heard from the 
German secret police that at a meeting in Romania, the Warsaw Pact powers 
had decided to kill the pope. This was apparently a leak of the forged SISMI 
document of May 19, 1981, which had made this claim. Thus the hearsay 
recounting of the substance of a forgery is Tagliabue’s “partial confirmation” 
of Agca’s claims of a plot. 

We should also note that while he cites these alleged “partial confirma¬ 
tions,” nowhere does Tagliabue list the contentions of Agca that remained 
unconfirmed. 


The Soviet-Bulgarian Motive 

Two of Tagliabue’s thirty-two paragraphs were devoted to expounding the 
Soviet motive in allegedly sponsoring Agca’s assassination attempt: “to crack 
religiously inspired resistance to Communist rule in Poland.” Tagliabue here 
follows a long-standing Times tradition of absolutely refusing to allow a coun¬ 
terargument to be voiced on this issue. Even if they covered their tracks well, 
a Soviet-inspired murder of the pope would have been blamed on the Soviets, 
solidified Polish hostility, and had enormously damaging effects on Soviet 
relations with Western Europe. Thus it would have been risky without any 
offsetting benefits. 5 

