United States lacked any significant popular support. The experienced 
U.S. pacification chief John Paul Vann, widely regarded as the U.S. 
official most knowledgeable about the situation in South Vietnam, 
wrote in 1965 that 

A popular political base for the Government of South Vietnam 
does not now exist. . . . The existing government is oriented 
toward the exploitation of the rural and lower class urban popula¬ 
tions. It is* in fact, a continuation of the French colonial system 
of government with upper class Vietnamese replacing the French. 
... The dissatisfaction of the agrarian population .., is expressed 
largely through alliance with the NLF. 34 

Virtually all parties concerned* apart from the United States, were 
making serious efforts in the early 7960s to avoid an impending war by 
neutralizing South Vietnam* Laos, and Cambodia—the official stand of 
the National Liberation Front, the “Viet Cong” of U.S- propaganda, 
essentially the southern branch of the Viet Minh. But the United States 
was committed to preventing any political settlement. 

Unable to develop any political base in the south, the U.S, govern¬ 
ment proceeded to expand the war. It was able to do this by continually 
manipulating the political scene in South Vietnam to assure the attain¬ 
ment of its objective: continued fighting until an anti-Communist re¬ 
gime, susceptible to American will, was established in the South. 
Ambassador Lodge observed in January 1964 that “It is obvious that the 
generals are all we have got/ 535 And we would keep replacing them until 
we got the right ones, “right 55 meaning that they were willing to follow 
orders and fight, not negotiate. One of Diem’s early replacements told 
newsmen that he found out that he was going to be the next head of 
state only when his U.S, adviser “told me that a coup d’etat was planned 



I &2 manufacturing consent 


in Saigon and that I was to become President . * .” General Maxwell 
Taylor spoke quite frankly about the need of “establishing some rea¬ 
sonably satisfactory government/ 5 replacing it if we are not satisfied, 
either with civilians, or with “a military dictatorship, 5536 

It should be noted in this connection that after the long-standing 
U.S, manipulation of governments in its client state had finally suc¬ 
ceeded in its aim, and the United States had placed in power two former 
French collaborators, Ky and Thieu, whose sole qualification for rule 
was that they met the U-S, condition of willingness to fight and evade 
political settlement, the U.S, media continued to pretend that the gov¬ 
ernment of South Vietnam was a free choice of the South Vietnamese 
people. 37 Thus the New York Times commented editorially on June 4, 
