in Nicaragua, but not in El Salvador and Guatemala. And our overall 
finding is that neither El Salvador nor Guatemala met any of the five 
basic conditions of a free election, whereas Nicaragua met some of 
them well, others to a lesser extent. 


3.3* THE COERCION PACKAGES 
IN EL SALVADOR, GUATEMALA, 
AND NICARAGUA 

As we noted, in the U.S. government’s sponsored elections, voter turn¬ 
out is interpreted as public support for the election and its sponsors. 
In disapproved elections (here, Nicaragua), this frame is abandoned, 
and voter turnout is either ignored or declared meaningless because of 
limited options or coercive threats by the authorities. But the question 
of coercive threats should clearly be raised in all cases where this is a 
potential problem. As we have just described, the elections in El Salva¬ 
dor were held under conditions of military rule where mass killings of 
“subversives” had taken place and a climate of fear had been estab¬ 
lished. If the government then sponsors an election and the local mili¬ 
tary authorities urge people to vote, a significant part of the vote should 
be assumed to be a result of built-in coercion. A propaganda model 
would anticipate that the U.S. mass media make no such assumption, 
and they did not. 

In El Salvador in 1982 and 1984, voting was also required by law. The 
law stipulated that failure to vote was to be penalized by a specific 
monetary assessment, and it also called on local authorities to check out 
whether voters did in fact vote. This could be done because at the time 
of voting one’s identification card (ID, cedula) was stamped, acknowl¬ 
edging the casting of a vote. Anybody stopped by the army and police 
would have to show the ID card, which would quickly indicate whether 
the individual had carried out his or her patriotic duty. Just prior to the 
March 1982 election, Minister of Defense Garcia warned the popula¬ 
tion in the San Salvador newspapers that the failure to vote would be 






LEGITIMIZING VERSUS MEANINGLESS THIRD WORLD ELECTIONS 107 


regarded as an act of treason. And in the 1984 election, “Advertising by 
the government and military prior to the elections stressed the obliga¬ 
tion to vote rather than the freedom to vote.” 60 Given the climate of 
fear, the voting requirement, the ID stamp, the army warning, and the 
army record in handling “traitors,” it is evident that the coercive ele¬ 
ment in generating turnout in Salvadoran elections has been large. This 
is supported by queries made by independent observers on rhe reasons 
why Salvadorans voted. 61 

In Guatemala, as in El Salvador, voting was required by law; nonvot¬ 
ers were subject to a fine of five quetzales ($1.25). Also, as in El Salvador, 
newspaper ads sponsored by the army asserted that it was treasonous 
to fail to vote or to vote null or blank. 62 The law group reported that 
“many” people expressed fears that nonvoting would subject them to 
reprisals, and after the military threats in the week before the election 
there was “a widespread belief that failure to vote would be punishable 
by more than the fivt-quetzal fine stipulated by law.” 63 

In Nicaragua, while registration was obligatory, voting was not re¬ 
quired by law. Voter-registration cards presented on election day were 
retained by election officials, so that the failure to vote as evidenced by 
the lack of a validated voter credential could not be used as the basis 
of reprisals. 64 Most of the voters appeared to LASA observers to be 
voting under no coercive threat—they did not have to vote by Jaw; they 
were urged to vote but not threatened with the designation of “traitors” 
for not voting; there were no obvious means of identifying nonvoters; 
and the government did not kill dissidents, in contrast to the normal 
practice in El Salvador and Guatemala. 

In sum, Nicaragua did not have a potent coercion package at work 
to help get out the vote—as did the Salvadoran and Guatemalan gov¬ 
ernments. 


3.4. EL SALVADOR: HOW THE 
U.S. MEDIA TRANSFORMED A 
“DERANGED KILLING 
MACHINE” INTO THE 
PROTECTOR OF AN INCIPIENT 
DEMOCRACY 


In reporting on the 1982 Salvadoran election, the U.S. mass media 
closely followed the government agenda. The personalities of the can¬ 
didates, the long lines waiting to vote, alleged rebel disruption, and 



ro8 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


turnout” were heavily featured, 65 As Jack Spence pointed out* “every 
media outlet* particularly the networks* cast the election-day story in 
a framework of voting in the midst of extensive guerrilla violence at 
polling places,” 66 Warren Hoge and Richard Meislin, of the New York 
Times , repeated day after day that the rebels were threatening disrup¬ 
