system “crisis,” which would require policy action some thirty-seven 
years ahead if certain conservative guesses were true and a number of 
easy corrections were ruled out, served the interests of conservative ideo¬ 
logues anxious to weaken a highly successful government program and a 
security industry eager to benefit from the partial or full privatization of 
Social Security. 144 The applicability of the propaganda model in these 
and other cases, including the media's handling of the “drug wars,” 
seems clear. 145 






INTRODUCTION xlix 


CONCLUDING NOTE 

The propaganda model remains a useful framework for analyzing and 
understanding the workings of the mainstream media—perhaps even 
more so than in 1988* As we noted above* the changes in structural con- 
ditions that underlie the model* and that we believe strongly and often 
decisively influence media behavior and performance* have tended to 
increase the model’s salience. We noted in the Preface to the first edition 
and in chapters 2 and 3, in reference to the media’s coverage of the wars 
and elections in Central America in the 1980s* that the media’s perform¬ 
ance often surpassed expectations of media subservience to government 
propaganda demands. This was at least equally true of their performance 
in covering the 1991 war against Iraq and NATO’s war against Yugo¬ 
slavia in 1999, as we have described earlier and briefly in regard to 
Yugoslavia and in detail elsewhere. 146 

In our conclusion to the first edition* we emphasized that* as the nega¬ 
tive performance effects of the media result primarily from their struc¬ 
ture and objectives* real change in performance calls for substantial 
changes in underlying media organization and goals. In the years since 
1988* structural changes have not been favorable to improved perform¬ 
ance* but it remains a central truth That democratic politics requires a 
democratization of information sources and a more democratic media. 
Along with trying to contain and reverse the growing centralization of the 
mainstream media, grassroots movements and intermediate groups that 
represent large numbers of ordinary citizens should put much more 
energy and money into creating and supporting their own media—as 
they did with the Independent Media Centers brought into existence 
during the Seattle and Washington* D.C.* protests of 1999 and 2000. 
These* and other nonprofit community-based broadcasting stations and 
networks* and a better use of public-access channels, the Internet* and 
independent print media* will be essential for the achievement of major 
democratic social and political successes. 


Notes to Introduction 

r. On a number of issues, such as trade agreements, health care* and the 
appropriate size of the military budget* there is a sharp division between 
media personnel and the elite on the one hand and the general population on 
the other hand* as we discuss below under “Further Applications,” 



1 INTRODUCTION 


2: This was even true in the Soviet Union* where the media’s disclosure of 
inconvenient facts on the Afghan war caused the Soviet defense minister to 
denounce the press as unpatriotic; see Bill Keller* “Soviet Official Says Press 
Harms Army,” Ate York Times, January 21, 1988. 

3. For an account of critiques, and the present writers’ replies, see Noam 
Chomsky, Necessary Illusions (Boston: South End Press, 1989), appendix 1; 
Edward S. Herman, “The Propaganda Model Revisited,” in The Myth of the 
Liberal Media (New York: Peter Lang, 1999). 

4. Ben Bagdikian, The Media Monopoly , 6th ed. (Boston: Beacon Press, 
2000), p. xxi. 

5. Ibid. 

6. Edward S. Herman and Robert McChesney, The Global Media (London: 
Cassell, 1997). 

7. Robert McChesney, Rich Media , Poor Democracy (Urbana: University of 
Illinois Press, 2000), p. 108. 

8. Ibid., p. 109. 

9. James Ledbetter, “Public Broadcasting Sells; (Out?),” The Nation, Decem¬ 
ber 1, 1997. 

10. Ibid. 

11. Stephanie Strom, “Japanese Sites for Women Aim for Empowerment,” 
New York Times , December 25, 2000. 

12. Mark Fineman, “Military Can’t Outflank Rebels in War of Words,” Los 
Angeles Times, February 21, 1995^ Leonard Doyle, “Rebels Try to Advance via 
Internet,” The Independent , March 7, 1995. 

13. Jim Shultz, “Bolivia’s Water War Victory,” Earth Island Journal, Septem¬ 
