the whole frame of discourse to shift to the assumption that the Nica¬ 
raguans had done something (and something intolerable, to boot). 
Newsweek, in a retrospective article entitled “The MIGs That Weren’t 
There*” had a lead head; “To bring in high-performance craft indicates 



138 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


that they are contemplating being a threat to their neighbors,” The fact 
that the MIGs weren't bronghr i n, as stated in the article’s very title— 
that this was a concoction of U.S. officials—doesn’t interfere with 
imputing an intention to the Nicaraguans based on a nonexistent fact. 
The assertion that they were contemplating being a threat, as opposed 
to defending themselves against a proxy invasion, is also a patriotic 
editorial judgment, Newsweek also says in the text that “All sides ap¬ 
peared to be playing a very clumsy and very dangerous game/’ This is 
an intriguing form of evenhandedness. A person who, admittedly, had 
been falsely accused of robbery by an assailant is alleged to be “playing 
a dangerous game,” along with the attacker who is also the bearer of 
false witness, 109 

In the middle of an article on the Nicaraguan election. Time inserts 
the government claim that a ship carrying crates of the type used to 
transport MIG-2IS was due at a Nicaraguan port. Time never questions 
a government propaganda ploy, no matter how blatant, and it offers a 
retrospective only when the government tacitly concedes it had deliber¬ 
ately deceived. Like Newsweek and the Times* Time allows the govern¬ 
ment to set the agenda with a public-relations statement: if the 
Nicaraguans did this, it would be a challenge to the United States. How 
then would we react, what are our policy options, etc. The truth of the 
claim and the likelihood that this is a manipulative ploy to help remove 
the unwanted elections from attention are not discussed; and, naturally, 
the fact that this is part of a policy of aggression against a tiny victim 
is never raised. 

The only credits in the media coverage of the MIG crisis go to CBS 
News, On November 6, Dan Rather gave the straight administration 
“news” that MIGs might be on their way and that a strategic option 
to destroy them was under consideration. On November 7 and 8, how¬ 
ever, perhaps out of a recognition that it had once again been “used,” 
CBS gave substantial coverage to Nicaraguan Foreign Minister Miguel 
D’Escoto’s rebuttal, which allowed him to point out the absurdity of 
the Nicaraguan “threat,” the tie-in of the MIG claims to the Nicarag¬ 
uan election, and the U.S. refusal to go along with the Contadora peace 
proposals. 

The MIG ploy was, nevertheless, entirely successful. A tone of crisis 
was manufactured, and “options” against the hypothetical Sandinista 
“threat” were placed at the center of public attention. The Nicaraguan 
election was nor discussed. LASA points out that “The final results of 
Nicaragua’s election were not even reported by most of the interna¬ 
tional media. They were literally buried under an avalanche of alarmist 
news reports” (p. 31). LASA concludes that the Nicaraguan electoral 




legitimizing versus meaningless third world elections 139 


process was manipulated* as the U.S. government claims* but by the 
U.S, government itself in its efforts to discredit an election that it did 
not want to take place. The Salvadoran and Guatemalan elections 
successfully legitimized the U.S.-backed regimes* at least for American 
elite opinion. The far more honest Nicaraguan election failed to accom¬ 
plish this, thanks to the loyal service of the media. 


3.9* THE ROLE OF OFFICIAL 
‘‘OBSERVERS*’ IN 
REINFORCING A 
PROPAGANDA LINE 

Official observers provide a perfect example of the use of government- 
controlled “experts'* and “pseudo-events 5 * to attract media attention 
and channel it in the direction of the propaganda line. And they regu¬ 
larly succeed in doing this in demonstration elections, no matter how 
brief their stay and foolish their comments (see appendix 1). The media 
take it for granted that official observers are newsworthy: they are 
notables, their selection by the government from “reputable” institu¬ 
tions adds to their credibility, and their observations will have effects 
on opinion and policy. This rationale is in the nature of a self-fulfilling 
prophecy; they have effects only because the media accord them atten¬ 
tion. As the official observers reliably commend the elections as fair 
without the slightest attention to basic conditions, the media's regular 
use of these observers for comments on election quality violates norms 
of substantive objectivity in the same manner as the use of any straight 
government handout by the Times or Pravda . 110 

The Nicaraguan election was remarkable for the number of foreign 
observers and observer teams. We pointed out earlier that Time men¬ 
tioned 450 foreign observers, but the magazine failed to cite any one 
of them (relying instead, and characteristically, on State Department 
handouts). As we saw, the State Department was able to get the media 
to follow its agenda, even though this involved them in a blatant rever¬ 
sal of the criteria they had employed the same year in El Salvador and 
Guatemala. It was also able to induce the media to disregard the out¬ 
come of the Nicaraguan election, with the help of the diversionary 
