
There is legitimate debate over the extent to which the grass-roots 
and other organizations sponsored by the ruling FSLN are indepen¬ 
dent, and whether they might not be a vehicle for both state propaganda 
and coercion, Oxfam America and its parent organization in London 
clearly find them constructive. Luis Hector Serra contends that the 
grass-roots organizations are relatively autonomous, and that their 
close relationship to the leadership of the FSLN “did not obstruct their 
capacity to express the concerns of their members at the local level.” 35 
He concludes that the popular organizations were “profoundly demo¬ 
cratic” in their effects of involving the populace in decision-making and 
educating them on the possibilities of participation in public life, 36 The 
difference with the organization of the Guatemalan peasantry in “poles 
of development,” where the essence of the organization was, quite 
openly, militaiy control by terror and enforced nonparticipaiiony is 
quite dramatic, whatever one’s general assessment of the FSLN popu¬ 
lar organizations may be. 

We conclude that on the third basic condition for a free election, El 
Salvador and Guatemala did not qualify in the years 1984-85; Nicara¬ 
gua did, at least to a significant degree, 37 


3.2.4. Freedom to organize parties, 
field candidates, and campaign for 

o f f i c e 

No party of the left could organize and present candidates in the 1982 
and 1984 elections in El Salvador. The Democratic Front (FDR) had 
been quickly driven underground. Five of its top leaders were seized 
in El Salvador in November 1980 by official and paramilitary forces, and 
were tortured, mutilated, and killed. A year before the March 1982 
election, the army published a list of 138 “traitors,” which included 
virtually all politicians of the left and left-center. Colonel Gutierrez, a 
powerful member of the junta, had stated forcefully that the FDR could 
not participate in the election because it was a “front” for the guerrillas. 
The invitation to the FDR and the FMLN to lay down their arms and 


LEGITIMIZING VERSUS MEANINGLESS THIRD WORLD ELECTIONS 101 


compete in the election was thus fraudulent, a fact confirmed by the 
admission of the U.S. embassy that the FDR could not safely campaign 
in El Salvador, with the accompanying suggestion that they might do 
so by means of videotapes sent in from outside the country's borders! 38 
Subsequently, even Duarte, the preferred candidate of the United 
States, was unable to campaign outside San Salvador in 1982 for fear 
of murder, and scores of Christian Democratic politicans were killed 
in the years In short, not only radical but even pro-U,S., 

mildly reformist parties could not escape decimation by political mur¬ 
der during those years. 

It should also be emphasized that no party could organize and run 
candidates in El Salvador that put high priority on terminating the war 
by negotiations with the rebels* What makes this especially important 
is that reporters and observers were unanimous in 1982 that the main 
thing the public wanted out of the election was peace. The propaganda 
formula for getting out the vote in 1982 was “ballots versus bullets,” 
with the implication that ballots were a possible route to a reduction 
in the use of bullets. If, in fact, no peace candidate was eligible to run, 
the election was a fraud for this reason alone* 

Defenders of these elections have argued that there was a substantial 
difference between the candidates, especially between D’Aubuisson and 
Duarte, so that voters had a meaningful choice. 40 But D’Aubuisson and 
Duarte did not disagree on the central issue of interest to the Salvado¬ 
ran people—whether to fight to win, or to strive for a negotiated settle¬ 
ment with the rebels* Both were members of the war party, with only 
tactical differences* Although Duarte made occasional demagogic 
claims that he would talk with the rebels and bring about peace, he 
never spelled out a peace-making agenda, never went beyond suggest¬ 
ing “dialogue” (as opposed to “negotiations,” which imply the possibil¬ 
ity of substantive concessions), and never departed from the position 
that the rebels should lay down their arms and participate in the new 
“democracy” that Duarte and the army had established* 

Duarte joined the junta at a moment of severe crisis in March 1980, 
when all the progressive civilians had left and immediately after the 
murder of the Christian Democratic attorney-general, Mario Zamora, 
by the newly prospering death squads* It was clear that the army and 
affiliated death squads had embarked on a policy of large-scale massa¬ 
cre. Duarte provided the fig leaf and apologetics that the army needed 
for the second matanza . 4l We believe that Duarte never would have 
received U*S* support and protection, and could not have survived in 
El Salvador, unless he had made it clear that he was in basic accord with 
the aims of the U.S. administration and the Salvadoran army. From 



102 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


1980 onward, Duarte always accepted fully the pursuit of a military 
solution and no compromise with “the subversives” (a phrase that 
Duarte uses continually, just as do the army and death-squad leaders). 
As Raymond Bonner points out, 

