
ish case is the Western press’s refusal to publicize the Turkish government’s 
attacks on the press, including the U.S. press’s own reporters in that country. 
UPI’s reporter Ismet Imset, beaten up by the Turkish police and imprisoned 
under trumped-up charges, was warned by UPI not to publicize the charges 
against him, and UPI eventually fired him for criticizing their badly compro¬ 
mised handling of his case. See Chris Christiansen, “Keeping In With The 
Generals,” New Statesman, January 4, 1985. 

119. We believe that the same dichotomization applies in the domestic sphere. 
For example, both British and American analysts have noted the periodic 
intense focus on—and indignation over—“welfare chiselers” by the mass 
media, and the parallel de-emphasis of and benign attitudes toward the far 
more important fraud and tax abuses of business and the affluent. There is also 
a deep-seated reluctance on the part of the mass media to examine the struc¬ 
tural causes of inequality and poverty. Peter Golding and Sue Middleton, after 
an extensive discussion of the long-standing “criminalization of poverty” and 
incessant attacks on welfare scroungers in Britain, point out that tax evasion, 
by contrast, is “acceptable, even laudable,” in the press, that the tax evader 
“is not merely a victim but a hero.” They note, also, that “The supreme 
achievement of welfare capitalism” has been to render the causes and condi¬ 
tion of poverty almost invisible (Images of Welfare: Press and Public Attitudes 
to Poverty [Oxford: Martin Robertson, 1982], pp. 66-67, 98-100, 186, 193). 

In a chapter entitled “The Deserving Rich,” A. J. Liebling pointed out that 
in the United States as well, “The crusade against the destitute is the favorite 
crusade of the newspaper publisher,” and that “There is no concept more 
generally cherished by publishers than that of the Undeserving Poor” (The 
Press [New York: Ballantine, 1964], pp. 78-79). Liebling went into great detail 
on various efforts of the media to keep welfare expenses and taxes down “by 
saying that they [the poor] have concealed assets, or bad character, or both” 
(p. 79). These strategies not only divert, they also help split the employed 
working class from the unemployed and marginalized, and make these all 
exceedingly uncomfortable about participating in a degraded system of 
scrounging. See Peter Golding and Sue Middleton, “Attitudes to Claimants: 
A Culture of Contempt,” in Images of Welfare, pp. i69ff. President Reagan’s 
fabricated anecdotes about welfare chiselers, and his complete silence on the 
large-scale chiseling of his corporate sponsors, have fitted into a long tradition 
of cynical and heartless greed. 

120. For a full discussion of this dichotomized treatment, see Edward S. Her¬ 
man, “Gatekeeper versus Propaganda Models: A Critical American Perspec¬ 
tive,” in Peter Golding, Graham Murdock and Philip Schlesinger, eds., 
Communicating Politics (New York: Holmes & Meier, 1986), pp. 182-94. 

121. Editorial, March 1, 1973. The Soviets apparently didn’t know that they 
were shooting down a civilian plane, but this was covered up by U.S. officials, 
and the false allegation of a knowing destruction of a civilian aircraft provided 
the basis for extremely harsh criticism of the Soviets for barbaric behavior. 
The Israelis openly admitted knowing that they were shooting down a civilian 
plane, but this point was of no interest in the West in this particular case. 

122. The New York Times Index, for example, has seven full pages of citations 
to the KAL 007 incident for September 1983 alone. 

123. Patriotic orgies, such as the 1984 Olympic Games in Los Angeles, the 



346 NOTES TO PAGES 32-35 


NOTES TO PAGES 38-43 347 


space-shuttle flights, and “Liberty Weekend,” perform a similar function in 
“bringing us all together.” See Elayne Rapping, The Looking Glass World of 
Nonfiction TV (Boston: South End Press, 1987), chapter 5, “National Rituals.” 

124. See below, chapter 6. 

125. On issues where the elite is seriously divided, there will be dissenting 
voices allowed in the mass media, and the inflation of claims and suspension of 
critical judgment will be subject to some constraint. See the discussion of this 
point in the preface, pp. xii-xiii, and examples in the case studies that follow. 

126. The role of the government in these cases cannot be entirely discounted, 
given the close ties of the Reader’s Digest to the CIA and the fact that Paul 
Henze, one of the primary sources and movers in the Bulgarian Connection 
campaign, was a longtime CIA official. On the CIA -Reader’s Digest connec¬ 
tion, see Epstein, “The Invention of Arkady Shevchenko,” pp. 40-41. On 
Henze, see below, chapter 4. On the strong likelihood that an influential 
Reader’s Digest best-seller on Cambodia was in part a CIA disinformation 
effort, see below chapter 6, p. 293, and sources cited. 

127. We provide many illustrations of these points in the chapters that follow. 
Watergate and, more recently, the late-Reagan-era exposures of Iran-Contra- 
gate, which are put forward as counterexamples, are discussed in chapter 7, 
below. 

128. These points apply clearly to the case of the alleged Bulgarian Connection 
in the plot to assassinate the pope. See below, chapter 4. 

129. We have noted elsewhere that the New York Times regularly relied upon 
Indonesian officials in “presenting the facts” about East Timor, which was 
being invaded by Indonesia, and ignored refugees, church sources, etc. In 
contrast, refugees, not state officials, were the prime source in the Times’ s 
reporting on postwar events in Vietnam and Cambodia ( The Washington Con¬ 
nection and Third World Fascism [Boston: South End Press, 1979], pp. IS 1 -? 2 * 
169-76, 184-87). On attempts to evade the obvious implications, see chapter 
