destabilize and overthrow. The U.S. government therefore went to 
great pains to cast the Nicaraguan election in an unfavorable light, 

A propaganda model would anticipate mass-media support of the 
state perspective and agenda. That is* the favored elections will be 
found to legitimize* no matter what the facts; the disfavored election 
will be found deficient, farcical* and failing to legitimize—again* irre¬ 
spective of facts. What makes this another strong test of a propaganda 
model is that the Salvadoran and Guatemalan elections of 1982 and 
1984—85 were held under conditions of severe* ongoing state terror 
against the civilian population, whereas in Nicaragua this was not the 
case. To find the former elections legitimizing and the Nicaraguan 
election a farce* the media would have had to use different standards 
of evaluation in the two sets of cases* and, more specifically* it would 
have been necessary for them to avoid discussing state terror and other 
basic electoral conditions in the Salvadoran and Guatemalan elections. 
As we will see* the media fulfilled these requirements and met the needs 
of the state to a remarkable degree. 

In order to demonstrate the applicability of a propaganda model in 
these cases* we will first describe the election-propaganda framework 
that the U.S. government tried to foist on the media; we will then 
review the basic electoral conditions under which elections were held 
in the three countries; and finally* we will examine how the U.S. mass 
media treated each of the three elections. 


3*1. ELECTION-PROPAGANDA 
FRAMEWORKS 

The U.S. government has employed a number of devices in its spon¬ 
sored elections to put them in a favorable light- It has also had an 
identifiable agenda of issues that it wants stressed, as well as others it 
wants ignored or downplayed- Central to demonstration-election man¬ 
agement has been the manipulation of symbols and agenda to give the 
favored election a positive image. The sponsor government tries to 
associate the election with the happy word “democracy” and the mili¬ 
tary regime it backs with support of the elections (and hence democ¬ 
racy). It emphasizes what a wonderful thing it is to be able to hold any 
election at all under conditions of internal conflict, and it makes it 




LEGITIMIZING VERSUS MEANINGLESS THIRD WORLD ELECTIONS 8$ 


appear a moral triumph that the army has agreed to support the election 
(albeit reluctantly) and abide by its results* 

The refusal of the rebel opposition to participate in the election is 
portrayed as a rejection of democracy and proof of its antidemocratic 
tendencies, although the ver y plan of the election involves the rebels* 
exclusion from the ballot* 2 The sponsor government also seizes upon 
any rebel statements urging nonparticipation or threatening to disrupt 
the election* These are used to transform the election into a dramatic 
struggle between, on the one side, the “born-again” democratic army 
and people struggling to vote for “peace,” and, on the other, the rebels 
opposing democracy, peace, and the right to vote* Thus the dramatic 
denouement of the election is voter turnout, which measures the ability 
of the forces of democracy and peace (the army) to overcome rebel 
threats* 

Official observers are dispatched to the election scene to assure its 
public-relations success. Nominally, their role is to see that the election 
is “fair,” Their real function, however, is to provide the appearance of 
fairness by focusing on the government's agenda and by channeling 
press attention to a reliable source* 3 They testify to fairness on the basis 
of long lines, smiling faces, no beatings in their presence, and the 
assurances and enthusiasm of U.S* and client-state officials* 4 But these 
superficialities are entirely consistent with a staged fraud* Fairness 
depends on fundamental conditions established in advance, which are 
virtually impossible to ascertain under the brief, guided-tour conditions 
of official observers. Furthermore, official observers in sponsored elec¬ 
tions rarely ask the relevant questions* 5 They are able to perform their 
public-relations function because the government chooses observers 
who are reliable supporters of its aims and publicizes their role, and the 
press gives them respectful attention* 6 

“Off the agenda” for the government in its own sponsored elections 
are all of the basic parameters that make an election meaningful or 
meaningless prior to the election-day proceedings. These include: (i) 
freedom of speech and assembly; (2) freedom of the press; (3) freedom 
to organize and maintain intermediate economic, social, and political 
groups (unions, peasant organizations, political clubs, student and 
teacher associations, etc.); (4) freedom to form political parties, orga¬ 
nize members, put forward candidates, and campaign without fear of 
extreme violence; and (5) the absence of state terror and a climate of 
fear among the public. Also off the agenda is the election-day “coercion 
package” that may explain turnout in terms other than devotion to the 
army and its plans, including any legal requirement to vote, and explicit 
or implicit threats for not voting* Other issues that must be downplayed 



90 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


in conforming to the government propaganda format are the U.S. gov¬ 
ernment's role in organizing and funding the election* the internal 
