
2. In the case of the Salvadoran elections of 1982 and 1984, the government 
relied on the media to play down not only this plan, but also the fact that the 
rebels were driven into rebellion by decades of refusal of the army to allow 
any democratic option, and that the rebels could not have participated in the 
election anyway because they would run heavy risks of being murdered—the 
five leaders of the political opposition in El Salvador were tortured, murdered, 
and mutilated in San Salvador in November 1980. 

3. As we pointed out in chapter 1, the government and other power groups try 
to monopolize media attention not only by flooding the media with their own 
propaganda, but also by providing authentic and reliable “experts” to validate 
this propaganda. 

4. For a model illustration of observer bias and foolishness, see appendix 1 on 
the findings of a U.S. official-observer team at the Guatemalan election of July 
1, 1984. 

5. “The observer delegation’s mission was a simple one: to assess the fairness, 
honesty and propriety of the voting, the counting of ballots and the reporting 



356 NOTES TO PAGES 89-94 


of final results in the Salvadoran elections” (Senator Nancy Kassenbaum, 
Report of the U.S. Official Observer Mission to the El Salvador Constituent 
Assembly Elections of March 28, 1982, Report to the Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee, 97th Cong., 2d sess., p. 2. This agenda does not include considera¬ 
tion of any of the basic framework conditions—like free speech and the 
absence of state terror—that determine in advance whether an election can be 
meaningful. See the text below. 

6. Th tNew York Times even allowed the right-wing Freedom House observers 
to dominate its reports on the election staged by Ian Smith in Rhodesia in 1979 
(articles of April 22 and May n, 1979). Although a brutal civil war raged and 
the rebel black groups were off the ballot, Freedom House found the election 
fair. In a rerun held a year later under British government auspices, the black 
candidate sponsored by Ian Smith who had received 65 percent in the “fair” 
election got only 8 percent of the vote, whereas the previously excluded black 
rebels received a commanding majority. Freedom House found the second 
election doubtful! See Herman and Brodhead, Demonstration Elections , appen¬ 
dix 1, “Freedom House Observers in Zimbabwe Rhodesia and El Salvador.” 

7. Herman and Brodhead, Demonstration Elections , pp. 71-72. 

8. Philip Taubman, “Shultz Criticizes Nicaragua Delay,” New York Times , 
February 6, 1984; Security and Development Assistance , Hearings before the 
Senate Foreign Relations Committee, 98th Cong., 2d sess., February 22,1984, 
