aggression and slaughter. Plainly, news about East Timor would not 
have been useful, and would, in fact, have discomfited important do¬ 
mestic power groups. The mass media—and the intellectual community 
generally—therefore channeled their benevolent impulses elsewhere: 
to Cambodia, not Timor. 

As we have stressed throughout this book, the U.S. media do not 
function in the manner of the propaganda system of a totalitarian state. 
Rather, they permit—indeed, encourage—spirited debate, criticism, 
and dissent, as long as these remain faithfully within the system of 
presuppositions and principles that constitute an elite consensus, a 
system so powerful as to be internalized largely without awareness. No 
one instructed the media to focus on Cambodia and ignore East Timor. 





CONCLUSIONS 303 


They gravitated naturally to the Khmer Rouge and discussed them 
freely 8 —just as they naturally suppressed information on Indonesian 
atrocities in East Timor and U,S. responsibility for the aggression and 
massacres* In the process* the media provided neither facts nor analyses 
that would have enabled the public to understand the issues or the bases 
of government policies toward Cambodia and Timor* and they thereby 
assured that the public could not exert any meaningful influence on the 
decisions that were made* This is quite typical of the actual “societal 
purpose” of the media on matters that are of significance for established 
power; not “enabling the public to assert meaningful control over the 
political process*” but rather averting any such danger* In these cases* 
as in numerous others, the public was managed and mobilized from 
above, by means of the media’s highly selective messages and evasions* 
As noted by media analyst W, Lance Bennett* 

The public is exposed to powerful persuasive messages from 
above and is unable to communicate meaningfully through the 
media in response to these messages, * * , Leaders have usurped 
enormous amounts of political power and reduced popular control 
over the political system by using the media to generate support* 
compliance* and just plain confusion among the public. 9 

More significantly for our particular concerns here, the media typically 
provide their own independent contribution even without being 
“used*” in the manner and for the reasons that we have discussed, 
Another media analyst, Ben Bagdikian, observes that the institutional 
bias of the private mass media “does not merely protect the corporate 
system. It robs the public of a chance to understand the real world,” 10 
That conclusion is well supported by the evidence we have reviewed* 
A propaganda model has a certain initial plausibility on guided free- 
market assumptions that are not particularly controversial* In essence* 
the private media are major corporations selling a product (readers and 
audiences) ro other businesses (advertisers). The national media typi¬ 
cally target and serve elite opinion* groups that, on the one hand* 
provide an optimal “profile” for advertising purposes* and, on the 
other, play a role in decision-making in the private and public spheres* 
The national media would be failing to meet their elite audience’s needs 
if they did not present a tolerably realistic portrayal of the world. But 
their “societal purpose” also requires that the media’s interpretation of 
the world reflect the interests and concerns of the sellers, the buyers, 
and the governmental and private institutions dominated by these 
groups. 



304 manufacturing consent 


A propaganda model also helps us to understand how media person¬ 
nel adapt, and are adapted, to systemic demands. Given the imperatives 
of corporate organization and the workings of the various filters, con¬ 
formity to the needs and interests of privileged sectors is essential to 
success. In the media, as in other major institutions, those who do not 
display the requisite values and perspectives will be regarded as “irre¬ 
sponsible,“ideological,” or otherwise aberrant, and will tend to fall by 
the wayside- While there may be a small number of exceptions, the 
pattern is pervasive, and expected. Those who adapt, perhaps quite 
honestly, will then be free to express themselves with little managerial 
control, and they will be able to assert, accurately, that they perceive 
no pressures to conform. The media are indeed free—for those who 
adopt the principles required for their “societal purpose.” There may 
be some who are simply corrupt, and who serve as “errand boys” for 
state and other authority, but this is not the norm. 11 We know from 
personal experience that many journalists are quite aware of the way 
the system operates, and utilize the occasional openings it affords to 
provide information and analysis that departs in some measure from the 
elite consensus, carefully shaping it so as to accommodate to required 
norms in a general way. But this degree of insight is surely not common. 
Rather, the norm is a belief that freedom prevails, which is true for 
those who have internalized the required values and perspectives. 

These matters are of some importance. We can readily understand 
why Guatemalan reporters do not report the atrocities of the 1980s; 
some fifty corpses dramatically illustrate the costs of deviance from 
authority on the part of independent journalists. To explain why 
American reporters avoid such topics, and even go so far as to describe 
Guatemala as a model for Nicaragua (see p. 115), requires further 
explanation, and the same is true in innumerable other similar cases, 
some of which we have analyzed in detail, A propaganda model pro¬ 
