carried out to try to mobilize support in its self-defense were subject 
to a virtual blackout in the ILS, mass media. The murder of Rutilio 
Grande was mentioned in Newsweek (“Priests in Peril,” Aug. 1,1977), 
but it never once reached the audiences of the New York Times, Time, 
or CBS News. This was important in allowing the terror to go on 
unimpeded. To paraphrase the New York Times editorial on “murder¬ 
ous Poland”: no publicity and agitation, no containment of terror. 




MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


2.3, ARCHBISHOP OSCAR 
ROMERO 

The murder of Archbishop Oscar Romero, the highest Catholic church 
official in El Salvador* was “big news*” and its political implications 
were enormous* At the time of his murder, Romero had become the 
foremost and most outspoken critic of the policy of repression by 
murder being carried out by the US .-supported military government. 
In his last sermon* he appealed to members of the army and security 
forces to refuse to kill their Salvadoran brethren, a call that enraged the 
officer corps trying to build a lower-class military that was willing to 
kill freely* Romero had been placed on right-wing death lists and 
received threats from the right wing* which from the beginning had 
been closely linked to the army and intelligence services* 15 Only a few 
weeks prior to his murder he had written a forceful letter to President 
Jimmy Carter opposing the imminent granting of U*S* aid to the junta 
as destructive of Salvadoran interests. The Carter administration had 
been so disturbed by Romero’s opposition to its policies that it had 
secretly lobbied the pope to curb the archbishop* 16 

Romero, in short, was not merely an “unworthy” victim, he was an 
important activist in opposition to the local alliance of army and oligar¬ 
chy and to US. policy in El Salvador* The US. media’s news coverage 
of the archbishop’s murder and its follow-up reflected well his threat¬ 
ening role* reaching new levels of dishonesty and propaganda service 
in their coverage of this and related events* 


2.3.1* Details of the murder and 
public response 

The details of the Romero murder provided by the U,S. mass media 
were concise (see table 2-2), While there were expressions of shock and 
distress* there were very few quotations and expressions of outrage by 
supporters of Romero. There were no statements or quotations suggest¬ 
ing that the murder was intolerable and that the guilty must be found 
