sons for the resort to violence were simple and have been amply docu¬ 
mented. 56 Recourse to violence was the only feasible response to the 
successes of the Viet Minh, reconstituted as the National Liberation 
Front (NLF), in organizing the peasantry, which left the United States 
only one option: to shift the struggle away from the political arena, 
where it was weak, to the arena of violence, where it was strong* Despite 
the U*S.-organized terror, the Communist party continued to advocate 
political action* The outline of strategy for the coming year sent to the 
South in late 1958 still called for political struggle without the use of 
arms* 57 As Jeffrey Race documents, when the Communist party finally 
authorized the use of violence in self-defense in 1959 in response to 
pleas from the southern Viet Minh, the slaughter could no longer 
proceed unimpeded, and government authority quickly collapsed. 
Nevertheless, . * the government terrorized far more than did the 
revolutionary movement—for example, by liquidations of former Viet- 
minh by artillery and ground attacks on ‘communist villages/ and by 
roundups of ‘communist sympathizers/ ” 

The fundamental source of strength for the revolutionary move¬ 
ment, Race continues, was the appeal of its constructive programs—for 
example, the land-reform program, which “achieved a far broader 
distribution of land than did the government program, and without the 
killing and terror which is associated in the minds of Western readers 
with communist practices in land reform.” On the contrary, “the princi¬ 
pal violence was brought about not by the Party but by the government, 
in its attempts to reinstall the landlords”—the usual pattern, in fact, 
although not “in the minds of Western readers.” The lowest economic 
strata benefited the most from the redistributive policies implemented. 
Authority was decentralized and placed in the hands of local people, 
in contrast to the rule of the U.S. client regime, perceived as “outside 
forces” by major segments of the local population: “what attracted 
people to the revolutionary movement was that it represented a new 
society in which there would be an individual redistribution of values, 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (l): VIETNAM r8g 


including power and status as well as material possessions,* 5 In Long 
An province, near Saigon, which Race studied intensively, the NLF had 
become dominant in the early 1960s, while the government apparatus 
and its armed forces dissolved without violent conflict, undermined by 
NLF organizing and propaganda. By late 1964, parts of the province 
were declared a free-strike zone, and by early 1965, “revolutionary 
forces had gained victory in nearly all the rural areas of Long An” 58 

The first units of the “North Vietnamese aggressors 51 entered the 
province at the time of the 1968 Tet offensive. In fact, up to summer 
1969, when the post-Tet accelerated pacification campaign had suc¬ 
ceeded in decimating the indigenous resistance, U.S. sources reported 
about eight hundred North Vietnamese “against an estimated total of 
49,000 Vietcong soldiers and support troops” in the entire Mekong 
Delta. 59 

This picture and what it entails was essentially invisible to the 
American public, and it is so remote from news coverage that sampling 
of the record is beside the point. The same remains true today outside 
of the specialist and dissident literature. 

The context of McNamara’s observation cited earlier on the crucial 
U.S. role in blocking the election and unification provisions after Ge¬ 
neva was the “growth of antiwar and neutralist sentiment in the Saigon- 
controlled areas 55 in 1964. This came at a time when virtually all 
Vietnamese factions, along with international opinion generally, were 
seeking a political solution among Vietnamese that would head offthe 
impending war to which the United States was committed because of 
its recognition that it had no political base in South Vietnam. 60 

The United States overturned the Diem regime in 1963 because of 
its ineptitude in conducting the war, as welt as because of fears that it 
was moving toward a negotiated settlement with the NLF. There were 
few illusions about popular support for the U.S. efforts to maintain and 
extend the military struggle. As for the generals, who are “all we have 
got, 55 as Ambassador Lodge recognized in January 1964, U.S. policy¬ 
makers knew little about them. William Bundy, soon to become assist¬ 
ant secretary of state for Far Eastern affairs, later commented that 
“Actually no one on our side knew what the new people were thinking 
at all. , , , Our requirements were really very simple—we wanted any 
government which would continue to fight.” The generals, however, 
did not want to continue to fight. Rather, along with the prime minister 
installed as a civilian cover for the military regime, they “wanted to 
move as rapidly as possible towards transferring the struggle for power 
in the South from the military to the political level, 55 leading to “a 
negotiated agreement among the Vietnamese parties themselves, with- 



190 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


out American intervention.” They saw the NLF “as preponderantly 
noncommunist in membership” and largely independent of Hanoi’s 
control* and regarded a political settlement among South Vietnamese 
as feasible in essential agreement with the official NLF program, 61 

But none of this was acceptable to the United States* President 
Johnson explained to Ambassador Lodge that his mission was “knock¬ 
ing down the idea of neutralization wherever it rears its ugly head,” 
because neutralism, as Ambassador Maxwell Taylor observed, “ap¬ 
