regime in Afghanistan that invited the Russians in might be justified, 
although the “freedom 55 that the Soviets were defending was perhaps 
minimal and the cost was far too high. 

Let us now turn to “the wild men in the wings” who adopt the 
principles universally accepted in the case of Soviet aggression when 
they approach the U.S. wars in Indochina. The basic facts are not in 
doubt. By the late 1940s, U.S. authorities took for granted that in 
backing France^ effort to reconquer its Indochina colonies after World 
War II, they were opposing the forces of Vietnamese nationalism repre¬ 
sented by the Viet Minh, led by Ho Chi Minh, In 1947, the State 
Department noted that Ho had established himself as “the symbol of 
nationalism and the struggle for freedom to the overwhelming majority 
of the population/ 528 By September 1948, the department deplored “our 
inability to suggest any practicable solution of the Indochina problem” 
in the light of “the unpleasant fact that Communist Ho Chi Minh is 
the strongest and perhaps the ablest figure in Indochina and that any 
suggested solution which excludes him is an expedient of uncertain 
outcome/ 5 the Communists under Ho having “capture[d] control of the 
nationalist movement/ 5 while the U.S. “long-term objective 55 was “to 
eliminate so far as possible Communist influence in Indochina/ 529 
Nonetheless, the United States supported the cause of France against 
Vietnam, covering some 80 percent of the cost of the war at the end 
and contemplating a direct U.S. attack, had France agreed. 

When the French withdrew, in 1954, the United States at once turned 
to the task of subverting the Geneva agreements that laid the ground¬ 
work for unification of Vietnam with countrywide elections by 1956, 








ISO MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


establishing a client state in South Vietnam (the GVN) that controlled 
its population with substantial violence and rejected the terms of the 
Geneva political settlement, with U,S, support. State terrorism evoked 
renewed resistance, and by 1959* Viet Minh cadres in the South, who 
were being decimated by U.S.-organized state terror, received authori¬ 
zation to use violence in self-defense, threatening the quick collapse of 
the U.S.-imposed regime, which by then had killed tens of thousands 
of people and alienated much of the peasantry as well as urban elites. 
The Vietnam correspondent for the London Times and the Economist, 
David Hotham, wrote in 1959 that the Diem regime imposed by the 
United States 
