signed in Paris. 

“Whatever their views of the war,” the narrator adds, “most Ameri¬ 
cans now believed that the cost had been too great,” particularly the 
cost of American lives; “They believed that no more Americans should 
die for Vietnam.” The only other Americans are those who thought it 
proper that “more Americans should die for Vietnam.” Americans were 
dying for Vietnam in the same sense in which Russian boys are dying 



252 manufacturing consent 


for Afghanistan* but those who could perceive this fact* and who op¬ 
posed the war not merely because the cost was too great but because 
aggression is wrong* are excluded from the category of Americans. 

As in the media retrospectives* the antiwar movement is given short 
shrift* A few activists are quoted* but permitted to discuss only ques¬ 
tions of tactics* Even Eugene McCarthy* plainly the favored antiwar 
figure in this presentation* says nothing except that “I think the case 
is rather clear about what’s wrong about our involvement”—which is 
fair enough* since the media’s favorite dove had never been a serious 
critic of the war and was to disappear quickly from the scene after 
failing to gain political power* thus demonstrating again where his 
commitments lay, James Fallows is permitted to describe “the spirit of 
the times”: “to look for the painless way out* namely* a physical defer¬ 
ment,” In the real world* this was a position that hardly defined “the 
spirit of the times*” although it is a facet of this “spirit” that is far more 
acceptable to mainstream opinion than the principled and courageous 
resistance of many thousands of young people* an intolerable phenome¬ 
non and therefore erased from the record* As Peter Biskind observes, 
for all the attempt at “balance*” and “despite the preference of [the 
PBS series] for doves over hawks, it is the right* not the left, that has 
set this film’s political agenda*” in conformity to elite opinion* 

Biskind concludes his review of the PBS series by stating: “The truth 
is that the war was a crime, not a tragedy. The tragedy is that this film 
lacks the conviction to say so,” The same may be said about the retro¬ 
spective commentary generally* The war was a “tragic error,” but not 
“fundamentally wrong and immoral” (as the overwhelming majority of 
the American people continue to believe)* and surely not criminal 
aggression—the judgment that would be reached at once on similar 
evidence if the responsible agent were not the United States* or an ally 
or client. 

Our point is not that the retrospectives fail to draw what seem to us* 
as to much of the population* the obvious conclusions; the more signif¬ 
icant and instructive point is that principled objection to the war as 
“fundamentally wrong and immoral,” or as outright criminal aggres¬ 
sion—a war crime—is inexpressible. It is not part of the spectrum of 
discussion. The background for such a principled critique cannot be 
developed in the media* and the conclusions cannot be drawn. It is not 
present even to be refuted. Rather* the idea is unthinkable* 

All of this again reveals with great clarity how foreign to the mobil¬ 
ized media is a conception of the media as a free system of information 
and discussion, independent of state authority and elite interests, 

* 




The Indochina Wars (II): 

Laos and 
Cambodia 


The geneva accords of 1954 provided for a political set- 
tlement in Laos and Cambodia* Both countries, however, were drawn 
into the U-$* attack on Indochina, with devastating consequences* In 
both cases, the media made a noteworthy contribution to this outcome. 


6*1. LAOS 

In Laos, as in Vietnam, the United States undertook to prevent a 
political settlement, as described frankly in congressional hearings by 
Ambassador Graham Parsons, who stated that “I struggled for 16 
months to prevent a coalition,” A U,S. military mission was established 
under civilian cover in violation of the Geneva Accords, headed by a 
general in civilian guise, and U.S, aid flowed in an effort to establish 
U,S. control. A measure of its scale and purposes is given by the fact 




254 manufacturing consent 


that Laos was “the only country in the world where the United States 
supports the military budget roo percent,” 1 

Nevertheless, a coalition government was established in 1958 after 
the only elections worthy of the name in the history of Laos, Despite 
extensive U.S. efforts, they were won handily by the left. Nine of the 
thirteen candidates of the Pathet Lao guerrillas won seats in the na¬ 
