liberty and tolerance for free speech. The army cannot permit the 
insidiousness and truculence of GAM’s maneuvers . . . that at¬ 
tempt to compromise the democratic international image of 
Guatemala. 112 

Although very similar threats preceded the murder of two leaders of 
GAM in March and April of 1984, the U.S. mass media entirely ignored 
this new information—despite strenuous efforts by GAM, the 
Guatemalan Human Rights Commission, and their allies to elicit pub¬ 
licity. As in the past, the unworthiness of these victims remains an 
essential ingredient in the Guatemalan army’s continued freedom to 
kill. 



3 

Legitimizing versus 
Meaningless Third World 
Elections: 

El Salvador 
Guatemala 
Nicaragua 


Third world elections provide an excellent testing 
ground for a propaganda model* Some elections are held in friendly 
client states to legitimize their rulers and regimes, whereas others are 
held in disfavored or enemy countries to legitimize their political sys¬ 
tems* This natural dichotomization is strengthened by the fact that 
elections in the friendly client states are often held under U,S. sponsor¬ 
ship and with extensive U.S. management and public-relations support. 
Thus, in the Dominican Republic in 1966, and periodically thereafter, 
the United States organized what have been called “demonstration 
elections” in its client states, defined as those whose primary function 
is to convince the home population that the intervention is well inten- 
tioned, that the populace of the invaded and occupied country wel¬ 
comes the intrusion, and that they are being given a democratic choice* 1 
The elections in El Salvador in 1982 and 1984 were true demonstra¬ 
tion elections, and those held in Guatemala in 1984-85 were strongly 
supported by the United States for image-enhancing purposes* The 



88 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


election held in Nicaragua in 1984* by contrast* was intended to legiti¬ 
mize a government that the Reagan administration was striving to 
