of literally pounding the place to bits*” 9 It is a highly significant fact 
that neither then, nor before, was there any detectable questioning of 
the righteousness of the American cause in Vietnam, or of the necessity 
to proceed to full-scale “intervention*” By that time, of course, only 
questions of tactics and costs remained open, and further discussion in 
the mainstream media was largely limited to these narrow issues. While 
dissent and domestic controversy became a focus of media coverage 
from 1965, the actual views of dissidents and resisters were virtually 
excluded. These individuals were presented primarily as a threat to 
order, and while their tactics might be discussed, their views were not: 
“The antiwar movement stood at the bottom of the media’s hierarchy 
of legitimate political actors,” Daniel Hallin concludes from his survey 
of television coverage (the print media were hardly different), “and its 
access to the news and influence over it were still more l imi ted.” 10 All 
exactly as the propaganda model predicts* 

As the war progressed, elite opinion gradually shifted to the belief 
that the U.S. intervention was a “tragic mistake” that was proving too 
costly, thus enlarging the domain of debate to include a range of tactical 
questions hitherto excluded- Expressible opinion in the media broad¬ 
ened to accommodate these judgments, but the righteousness of the 
cause and nobility of intent were rarely subject to question- Rather, 
editorials explained that the “idealistic motives” of “the political and 
military commands” who “conceive[d] their role quite honestly as that 
of liberators and allies in the cause of freedom , , . had little chance to 
prevail against local leaders skilled in the an of manipulating their 
foreign protectors.” 11 “Our Vietnamese” were too corrupt and we were 
too weak and too naive to resist their manipulations, while “their Viet¬ 
namese” were too wily and vicious. How could American idealism cope 


THE INDOCHINA WARS (i): VIETNAM I73 


with such unfavorable conditions? At the war’s end, the liberal media 
could voice the lament that “the high hopes and wishful idealism with 
which the American nation had been born , . * had been chastened by 
the failure of America to work its will in Indochina.” 12 But no conflict 
can be perceived between “wishful idealism” and the commitment to 
“work our will” in foreign lands* a comment that holds of “the culture” 
more broadly. 

As for direct reporting, the major charge of the influential Freedom 
House study of the Tet offensive* echoed by others who condemn the 
media for their overly “adversarial” stance, is that reporting was too 
“pessimistic.” We return to the facts, but consideration of the logic of 
the charge shows that even if accurate, it would be quite consistent with 
a propaganda model. There was, no doubt, increased pessimism within 
the German general staff after Stalingrad. Similarly, Soviet elites 
openly expressed concern over the wisdom of “the defense of Afghanis¬ 
tan” and its costs, and some might have been “overly pessimistic” about 
the likelihood of success in this endeavor. But in neither case do we 
interpret these reactions as a departure from service to the national 
cause as defined by the state authorities. The Freedom House charge 
tacitly but clearly presupposes that the media must not only accept the 
framework of government propaganda, but must be upbeat and enthu¬ 
siastic about the prospects for success in a cause that is assumed with¬ 
out discussion to be honorable and just. 

This basic assumption endures throughout, and provides the basic 
framework for discussion and news reports. The harshest critics within 
the mainstream media, as well as what Corry calls “the culture,” held 
that the war began with “blundering efforts to do good,” although “by 
1969” (that is, a year after corporate America had largely concluded that 
this enterprise should be liquidated) it had become “clear to most of 
the world—and most Americans—that the intervention had been a 
disastrous mistake,” and that it was a “delusion” to attempt to build “a 
nation on the American model in South Vietnam”; the argument against 
the war “was that the United States had misunderstood the cultural and 
political forces at work in Indochina—that it was in a position where 
it could not impose a solution except at a price too costly to itself’ 
(Anthony Lewis). 13 Stanley Karnow’s highly praised companion vol¬ 
ume to the PBS television series describes the American war as “a failed 
crusade” undertaken for aims that were “noble” although “illusory” 
and “motivated by the loftiest intentions”: specifically, the commitment 
“to defend South Vietnam’s independence.” 14 

Within “the culture,” it would be difficult to find harsher critics of 
U.S. Asia policy than John King Fairbank, the dean of American China 



174 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


scholarship, or Harvard government professor Stanley Hoffmann, or 
Dissent editor Irving Howe, In his presidential address to the American 
Historical Association in December 1968, Fairbank characterized the 
U.S* involvement, which he termed a “disaster,” as the result of “an 
excess of righteousness and disinterested benevolence,” an “error” 
based on misunderstanding* Howe explained that “we opposed the war 
because we believed, as Stanley Hoffman [sic] has written, that "Wash¬ 
ington could “save” the people of South Vietnam and Cambodia from 
Communism only at a cost that made a mockery of the word “save*” 5 ” 
Hoffmann explains later that our efforts in “supporting the South Viet¬ 
namese” were “undermined” by the way the war was fought, while the 
means adopted to “deter the North Vietnamese from further infiltra¬ 
tion” were “never sufficient”; and sufficient means, “had the United 
States been willing to commit them, would have created for the United 
States real external dangers with potential adversaries and in relations 
