
228 manufacturing consent 


propaganda requirements of state policy by methods that are a travesty 
of honest journalism (let alone scholarship)—all, of course, in the 
interest of “freedom/* 


5.5*3- The Paris Peace Agreements 

The Tet offensive convinced large sectors of elite opinion that the costs 
of the U.S. effort were too high- Lyndon Johnson stepped down. In 
what was termed by the government a “bombing halt/ 5 and reported 
as such* the bombers were shifted from North Vietnamese targets to 
Laos, where the defenseless rural society of scattered villages in the 
North was demolished, and later Cambodia, where the same was true 
on an even more horrendous scale. U S. forces undertook the violent 
and destructive post-Tet accelerated pacification campaign in the 
South, and bombing was intensified to “step up refugee programs deliber¬ 
ately aimed at depriving the VC of a recruiting base 3 w in accordance with 
the advice of pacification director Robert Komer in April 1967, 136 The 
Phoenix program was established to destroy the “infrastructure* 5 of the 
NLF by terror. The burden of ground fighting was shifted to Viet¬ 
namese forces supplied and directed by the United States, and U.S, 
conscripts were withdrawn, a more typical pattern for colonial wars that 
essentially duplicated the earlier French effort to reconquer Indochina. 
And the United States finally agreed to pursue the path of a negotiated 
settlement, although still not relinquishing the aim of preventing the 
unification of Vietnam and retaining Indochina, apart from North Viet¬ 
nam, within the U.S. global system. 

This was not the maximal goal the United States had pursued; thus 
in the late 1950s the U.S. government still hoped for unification 
of Vietnam under anti-Communist leadership, and the U.S* client 
regime always regarded itself as the government of all of Vietnam 
(GVN ^ Government of Vietnam), and so declared in the first and 
unamendable article of its constitution. But by the late 1960s, if not 
before, control over all Indochina apart from North Vietnam was re¬ 
garded as the maximum goal attainable. As we have seen, opportunities 
for a peaceful diplomatic settlement had long existed, but they had 
never been pursued because they were regarded as inconsistent with the 
essential goal: preservation of an “independent” South Vietnam that 
would be a U.S. client state. 

By October 1972, the negotiators in Paris had reached the essential 
terms of an agreement: the 9-Poim Plan, President Nixon, however, 
objected to the terms of the agreement, and the Thieu government in 


