York Times , January 8, 1988. Cruz now expresses the belief that the anti- 
Sandinista coalition (the Coordinadora) that nominated him “was dominated 
by people who never intended to go through with an election campaign,” and 
“sought to embarrass the Sandinistas by withdrawing.” 

102. See note 91, above, and tables 3-2 and 3-3, below. 

103. Philip Taubman, “U.S. Role in Nicaragua Vote Disputed,” New York 
Times , October 21, 1984. Robert McCartney, in the Washington Post of June 
30,1984, stated that “Opposition leaders admitted in interviews that they never 
seriously considered running in the Nov. 4 election but debated only whether 
to campaign for two months and then withdraw from the race on grounds that 
the Sandinistas had stacked the electoral deck against them.” 

104. Lord Chitnis, a veteran British election observer who attended the Sal¬ 
vadoran election on behalf of the British Parliamentary Human Rights Group, 


noted that “First, and crucial to the whole standing of the exercise, was the 
fact that no politicians to the left of the Christian Democrats [PDC], and not 
all of them, were free to contest the election.... [Exclusion of the FDR made 
the election] a contest of vague promises and inferences by two candidates who 
already bore a heavy responsibility for the situation in which El Salvador finds 
itself today.” The 1984 elections in El Salvador, he continued, were held in an 
“atmosphere of terror and despair, of macabre rumour and grisly reality” 
(Pratap C. Chitnis, “Observing El Salvador: The 1984 Elections,” Third World 
Quarterly [October 1984], pp. 971 - 73 ). Chitnis was never cited as a source 
anywhere in the U.S. mass media. 

105. Stephen Kinzer, “Ortega: Can He Be Trusted?” New York Times Maga¬ 
zine, January 10, 1988; Kinzer, “Ex-Contra Looks Back” New York Times , 
January 8,1988. On the realities of the peace accords, and the media contribu¬ 
tion to effacing them in serving the government’s agenda, see Chomsky, Cul¬ 
ture of Terrorism, and articles updating the record inZ magazine (January 1988, 
March 1988). 

106. There is also an elaborate media pretense that La Prensa is the journal 
that courageously opposed Somoza, and whose editor was a victim of this 
U.S.-backed gangster. But the media are surely well aware that the relation 
of the two journals is barely more than that of a shared name. The editor left 
in 1980, after a conflict with the owners, to form the new journal El Nuevo 
Diario, and was joined by 80 percent of the staff. It is this journal, if any, that 
can fairly claim to be the descendant of the old La Prensa (Council on 
Hemispheric Affairs, Washington Report on the Hemisphere, July 23, 1986). 

107. The leading church opponent of the state in El Salvador, Archbishop 
Oscar Romero, was murdered, and his murderers have never been ap¬ 
prehended. In Nicaragua, the leading church opponent of the state, Cardinal 
Obando, continues to live and speak out without fear. This difference is never 
pointed out in the free press. 

108. For a more detailed discussion of the Times’s articles on these subjects, 
see Edward S. Herman, “ ‘Objective’ News as Systematic Propaganda: The 
New York Times on the 1984 Salvadoran and Nicaraguan Elections,” Covert 
Action Information Bulletin 21 (Spring, 1984). 

109. In a larger framework, too, Nicaragua is playing the dangerous game of 
trying to defend itself against external attack, resisting the demands of the 
godfather. The absurdity of the claim that Nicaragua would become a military 
“threat” to its neighbors with added MIGs, when the Reagan administration 
has been looking for an excuse to attack Nicaragua and would welcome any 
such Nicaraguan move as an opportunity to intervene directly, never strikes 
the U.S. mass media. The possibility that the administration wants to constrain 
Nicaraguan arms imports to reduce its capacity to defend itself against ongoing 
aggression against it also never arises for the press. Note that unlike guerrilla 
forces, the contras can survive only with regular airdrops, reaching the level 
of thirty to forty a month by mid-1987, and two or three times that amount 
after August, as the U.S. sought to undermine the Guatemala accords. Hence 
Nicaragua would have good reason to obtain vintage 1950s jet planes to defend 
itself from the U.S. proxy army. 

no. For an account of the performance of U.S. official and semi-official ob¬ 
servers in the Dominican Republic, Vietnam, El Salvador, and Zimbabwe, see 


Herman and Brodhead, Demonstration Elections . Appendix i provides a sum¬ 
mary of the views of an official U.S. observer team to Guatemala in July 1984. 
All of these fully confirm the statement made in the text. 
hi. LASA, Report, p. 5. 


Chapter 4: The K G B - B u 1 g a r i a n Plot to 
Kill the Pope 

1. Some qualification is required by the fact that the three principal sources 
hired by and/or relied upon by the private media—Claire Sterling, Paul 
Henze, and Michael Ledeen—all had long-standing relations with the govern¬ 
ment, and that various Italian government organizations such as the intelli¬ 
gence agency SISMI played a role in the genesis and propagandizing of the 
charges, as described in the text below. 

2. The limited exceptions to these generalizations will be noted below. 

3. See further, Edward S. Herman and Frank Brodhead, The Rise and Fall of 
the Bulgarian Connection (New York: Sheridan Square Publications, 1986), pp. 
66-71; also Philip Pauli, “International Terrorism: The Propaganda War” 
(M.A. thesis in international relations, San Francisco State University, June 
19S2). 

4. The reasons why this was important to Begin are discussed in the works 
