and hamlets had been spared. Bridges had been destroyed* fields up to 
the rivers were holed with bomb craters/’ 7 After Decornoy’s reports* 
there could be no doubt that the U.S. Air Force was directing murder¬ 
ous attacks against the civilian society of northern Laos. These reports 
of terrible destruction were repeatedly brought to the attention of the 
media* but ignored or, more accurately, suppressed. Later described as 
“secret bombings” in an “executive war,” the U.S. attack was indeed 
“secret,” not simply because of government duplicity as charged but 
because of press complicity. 

Not only did the media fail to publish the information about the 
attack against a defenseless civilian society or seek to investigate further 
for themselves* but they proceeded to provide exculpatory accounts 
that they knew to be inaccurate* on the rare occasions when the bomb¬ 
ing was mentioned at all. As the bombing of Laos began to be reported 
in 1969* the claim was that it was targeted against North Vietnamese 
infiltration routes to South Vietnam (the “Ho Chi Minh trail”), and* 
later* that U.S. planes were providing tactical support to government 
forces fighting North Vietnamese aggressors* a far cry from what 
Decornoy had witnessed and reported* and a much more tolerable 
version of the unacceptable facts. 8 

Keeping just to the New York Times, through 1968 there was no 
mention of the bombing apart from tiny items reporting Pathet Lao 
complaints (Dec, 22,31* 1968). On May 18,1969, the Times reported U.S. 
bombing in Laos, alleging that it was “directed against routes* including 
the so-called Ho Chi Minh Trail* over which the North Vietnamese 
send men and supplies to infiltrate South Vietnam.” A June 14 report 
states that “American planes bomb targets all over Laos* especially 
along the Ho Chi Minh Trail in an effort to harass the Pathet Lao* the 
Communist-led rebel movement in Laos* and to stop the flow of enemy 
supplies to South Vietnam-” Charles Mohr reported on July 16 that 
U.S. bombing “is directed against infiltration routes from North Viet¬ 
nam that pass through Laos en route to the South.” There is a July 28 
reference to “200 American bombing sorties a day over northeastern 
Laos,” directed against North Vietnamese forces, and Hedrick Smith 
adds from Washington on August 2 that the United States “has been 
bombing North Vietnamese concentrations” in Laos, T. D. Allman 
reported bombing sorties “in tactical support” of government forces 
fighting the North Vietnamese and “harassing attacks against Commu¬ 
nist positions all over northeast Laos” on August 25* the latter providing 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (il): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 257 


the first glimpse of something beyond the approved version. Further 
reports of U*S. air power in tactical support and “to cut North Viet¬ 
namese supply routes” appear on September 7* followed by Allman’s 
report of successes of a government offensive with forces “stiffened by 
Thai soldiers,” supported by “the most intense American bombing ever 
seen in Laos” (Sept* 18)* Then followed reports from Washington and 
Vientiane (Sept, 19, 20, 23* 24, 30) confirming that the U,S. Air Force 
was providing tactical support for government combat missions in addi¬ 
tion to bombing North Vietnamese infiltration routes, including a Sep¬ 
tember 23 Agence-France-Presse dispatch reporting “bombing of 
Pathet Lao areas by United States aircraft/ 5 thus implying that the 
bombing went well beyond infiltration routes and combat operations, 
common knowledge in Paris and Vientiane but yet to be reported here. 

In short, the terror bombing of northern Laos, although known, 
remained off the agenda, and reporting in general was slight and highly 
misleading, to say the least. Elterman observes that the war in Laos and 
Cambodia was virtually “invisible” in the media through 1969, apart 
from the leftist National Guardian, which gave substantial coverage to 
what was in fact happening. 9 

On October 1, 1969, the New York Times finally ran an account by 
T. D. Allman, whose valuable reporting throughout the war appeared 
primarily overseas, concluding that “the rebel economy and social fab¬ 
ric” were “the main United States targets now,” and that the American 
bombardment had driven the population to caves and tunnels during 
the daylight hours, making it difficult for the Pathet Lao “to fight a 
£ people 5 s war 5 with fewer and fewer people.” Control of territory was 
now of lesser importance, he wrote, “with United States bombers able 
to destroy, almost at will, any given town, bridge, road or concentration 
of enemy soldiers or civilians*” 10 

This confirmation of what had long been known in restricted peace- 
movement circles, and consciously suppressed in the mainstream press, 
passed without particular notice* The CIA clandestine army had swept 
through the Plain of Jars in the preceding months, evacuating all re¬ 
maining civilians to areas near Vientiane, where they and their harrow¬ 
ing stories were largely ignored by the well-represented media, 
although available elsewhere. 11 

Walter Haney, a Lao-speaking American who compiled a detailed 
collection of refugee interviews that was described as “serious and 
carefully prepared 55 by U.S. Ambassador to Laos William Sullivan, 
quotes remarks by a UN official in Laos as “the most concise account 
of the bombing”: 



258 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


By 1968 the intensity of the bombings was such that no organized 
life was possible in the villages* The villages moved to the outskirts 
