4. Anthony Lewis says that the Soviet dissidents “are enough like us so that 
we identify with them” (“A Craving for Rights,” New York Times, Jan. 31, 
I 977 )* a partially valid point, as the vast majority of victims of U.S. foreign 
policy are Third World peasants, but invalid in that victims in U.S. client states 
as much “like us” as Soviet dissidents do not get comparable attention, as 
shown in the cases mentioned and the reference in note 2. 

5. It is not coincidental that the U.S. secretary of state, Alexander Haig, and 
the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, Jeane Kirkpatrick, actually de¬ 
fended the assassinations of the American women, as described below. 

6. Apart from the details by the New York Times shown in table 2-2, there were 
at least four other Times articles that repeated such information, and similar 
detail was given in Time and Newsweek and on CBS News. To give a sample 
of one of many in Time, an article entitled “Grim Tale: Details of a Martyr’s 
Death” (Nov. 19, 1984), reads as follows: “Church officials who viewed 
the martyred priest’s body reported that he had been savagely beaten. A rope 
had been tied around his neck, wrists and ankles so that he would strangle 
himself if he struggled to get free. Three fingers of Popieluszko’s left hand 
were sliced through to the bone, and there were deep gouges on his arms. 
His lungs contained enough water to indicate that he was still breathing, 
even if unconscious, when he was tossed, bound hand and foot, into 
a reservoir.” Time repeats these details and others with obvious relish at 
every opportunity. As we will see, Time is less lavish in details on unworthy 
victims. 

7. Time’s account entitled “Memories of Father Jerzy” (Nov. 12,1984) has no 
counterpart in the articles on the deaths of the unworthy victims discussed 
below. 

8. “A Polish General is Tied to Death of Warsaw Priest,” November 3,1984; 
“Pole in Killing Tells of Hints of Top-Level Backup,” January 9,1985; “Pole 



on Trial Names 2 Generals,” January 5, 1985; “Second Abductor of Polish 
Priest Says Order Came ‘From the Top,’ ” January 3, 1985. 

9. See chapter 4, below. 

10. On May 6, 1986, Laura Pinto, a member of the Salvadoran “Mothers of 
the Disappeared,” was picked up by three armed men, beaten, raped, and left 
on the street. On May 29 she was again abducted and tortured, and shortly 
thereafter twelve members of her group were detained by the police. The 
British New Statesman expressed surprise that this kind of terror could take 
place, given the fact that Laura Pinto had previously traveled to Europe and 
made Western Europeans aware of her existence (Jane Dibblin, “El Salvador’s 
Death Squads Defy European Opinion,” June 13, 1986). Western Europeans 
did, in fact, protest these abuses. What made this terror feasible, however, was 
the fact that the power directly involved in El Salvador, the United States, has 
