Important branches of the media such as movies and books have had 
substantia] global markets for many years, but only in the past two 
decades has a global media system come into being that is having major 
effects on national media systems, culture, and politics . 6 It has been 
fueled by the globalization of business more generally* the associated 
rapid growth of global advertising* and improved communications tech- 
nology that has facilitated cross-border operations and control. It has 
also been helped along by government policy and the consolidation of 
neoliberal ideology. The United States and other Western governments 
have pressed the interests of their home-country firms eager to expand 
abroad* and the International Monetary Fund fIMF) and World Bank 
have done the same, striving with considerable success to enlarge trans¬ 
national corporate access to media markets across the globe. Neoliberal 
ideology has provided the intellectual rationale for policies that have 
opened up the ownership of broadcasting stations and cable and satellite 
systems to private transnational investors. 

The culture and ideology fostered in this globalization process relate 
largely to “lifestyle” themes and goods and their acquisition; and they 
tend to weaken any sense of community helpful to civic life. Robert 
McChesney notes that “the hallmark of the global media system is its 
relentless* ubiquitous commercialism .” 7 Shopping channels* “infomer¬ 
cials , 55 and product placement are booming in the global media system. 
McChesney adds that “it should come as no surprise that account after 
account in the late 1990 s documents the fascination* even the obsession* 
of the world’s middle class youth with consumer brands and products .” 3 
The global media’s “news” attention in recent years, aside from reporting 
on crusades such as “Operation Allied Force” (the NATO war against 
Yugoslavia) and on national elections* has been inordinately directed to 
sensationalism, as in their obsessive focus on the O. J, Simpson trial, the 
Lewinsky scandal* and the deaths of two of the West’s supercelebrities* 
Princess Diana and John F. Kennedy* Jr. 

Globalization, along with deregulation and national budgetary pres- 
sures* has also helped reduce the importance of noncommercial media 
in country after country. This has been especially important in Europe 
and Asia* where public broadcasting systems were dominant (in contrast 
with the United States and Latin America). The financial pressures on 
public broadcasters has forced them to shrink or emulate the commercial 
systems in fund-raising and programming* and some have been fully 




INTRODUCTION XV 


commercialized by policy change or privatization* The global balance of 
power has shifted decisively toward commercial systems* James Ledbet¬ 
ter points out that in the United States, under incessant right-wing polit¬ 
ical pressure and financial stringency, “the 90 s have seen a tidal wave of 
commercialism overtake public broadcasting,” with public broadcasters 
“rushing as fast as they can to merge their services with those offered by 
commercial networks And in the process of what Ledbetter calls the 
“mailing” of public broadcasting, its already modest differences from the 
commercial networks have almost disappeared* Most important, in their 
programming “they share either the avoidance or the defanging of con¬ 
temporary political controversy, the kind that would bring trouble from 
powerful patrons .” 10 

Some argue that the Internet and the new communications technolo¬ 
gies are breaking the corporate stranglehold on journalism and opening 
an unprecedented era of interactive democratic media. And it is true 
and important that the Internet has increased the efficiency and scope 
of individual and group networking. This has enabled people to escape 
the mainstream media’s constraints in many and diverse cases. Japanese 
women have been able to tap newly created Web sites devoted to their 
problems, where they can talk and share experiences and information 
with their peers and obtain expert advice on business, financial, and per¬ 
sonal matters , 11 Chiapas resisters against abuse by the Mexican army and 
government were able to mobilize an international support base in 1995 
to help them publicize their grievances and put pressure on the Mexican 
government to change its policies in the region , 12 The enlarged ability of 
Bolivian peasants protesting against World Bank privatization programs 
and user fees for water in 2000 , and Indonesian students taking to the 
streets against the Suharto dictatorship in Indonesia in 1998 , to commu¬ 
nicate through The Internet produced a level of publicity and global 
attention that had important consequences: Bechtel Corporation, owner 
of the newly privatized water system in Bolivia that had quickly doubled 
water rates, backed off and the privatization sale was rescinded; the pro¬ 
tests and associated publicity, along with the 199 S financial crisis , helped 
drive Suharto from office . 13 

Broader protest movements have also benefited from Internet-based 
communication. When the leading members of the World Trade Organi¬ 
zation (WTO) attempted in 1998 to push through in secret a Multilateral 
Agreement on Investment that would have protected further the rights of 
international investors as against the rights of democratic bodies within 
states, the Internet was extremely valuable in alerting opposition forces 
to the threat and helping mobilize an opposition that prevented accept- 



XVi INTRODUCTION 


ance of this agreement . 14 Similarly, in the protest actions against the 
WTO meetings in Seattle in November 1999 and the IMF and World 
Bank annual gatherings in Washington* D.C.* in April 2000 , communi¬ 
cation via the Internet played an important role both in organizing the 
