vides a basis for understanding this pervasive phenomenon. 

No simple model will suffice, however, to account for every detail of 
such a complex matter as the working of the national mass media, A 
propaganda model, we believe, captures essential features of the pro¬ 
cess, but it leaves many nuances and secondary effects unanalyzed. 
There are other factors that should be recognized. Some of these con¬ 
flict with the “societal purpose” of the media as described by the 
propaganda model; some support it. In the former category, the human¬ 
ity and professional integrity of journalists often leads them in direc¬ 
tions that are unacceptable in the ideological institutions, and one 
should not underestimate the psychological burden of suppressing ob¬ 
vious truths and maintaining the required doctrines of benevolence 








CONCLUSIONS 305 


(possibly gone awry)* inexplicable error, good intentions, injured inno¬ 
cence, and so on, in the face of overwhelming evidence incompatible 
with these patriotic premises. The resulting tensions sometimes find 
limited expression, but more often they are suppressed either con¬ 
sciously or unconsciously, with the help of belief systems that permit 
the pursuit of narrow interest, whatever the facts. 

In the category of supportive factors, we find, first of all, elemental 
patriotism, the overwhelming wish to think well of ourselves, our insti¬ 
tutions, and our leaders. We see ourselves as basically good and decent 
in personal life, so it must be that our institutions function in accord¬ 
ance with the same benevolent intent, an argument that is often persua¬ 
sive even though it is a transparent non sequitur . The patriotic premise 
is reinforced by the belief that u we the people” rule, a central principle 
of the system of indoctrination from early childhood, but also one with 
little merit, as an analysis of the sociahand political system will quickly 
reveal. There are also real advantages in conformity beyond the re¬ 
wards and privilege that it yields. If one chooses to denounce Qaddafi, 
or the Sandinistas, or the FLO, or the Soviet Union, no credible evi¬ 
dence is required. The same is true if one repeats conventional doc¬ 
trines about our own society and its behavior—say, that the U.S. 
government is dedicated to our traditional noble commitment to de¬ 
mocracy and human rights. But a critical analysis of American institu¬ 
tions, the way they function domestically and their international 
operations, must meet far higher standards; in fact, standards are often 
imposed that can barely be met in the natural sciences. One has to work 
hard, to produce evidence that is credible, to construct serious argu¬ 
ments, to present extensive documentation—all tasks that are super¬ 
fluous as long as one remains within the presuppositional framework of 
the doctrinal consensus. It is small wonder that few are willing to 
undertake the effort, quite apart from the rewards that accrue to con¬ 
formity and the costs of honest dissidence. 

There are other considerations that tend to induce obedience. A 
journalist or commentator who does not want to have to work too hard 
can survive, even gain respectability, by publishing information (official 
or leaks) from standard sources; 12 these opportunities may well be 
denied to those who are not content to relay the constructions of state 
propaganda as fact. The technical structure of the media virtually 
compels adherence to conventional thoughts; nothing else can be ex¬ 
pressed between two commercials, or in seven hundred words, without 
the appearance of absurdity that is difficult to avoid when one is chal¬ 
lenging familiar doctrine with no opportunity to develop facts or argu¬ 
ment. In this respect, the U.S. media are rather different from those in 



306 manufacturing consent 


most other industrial democracies, and the consequences are noticeable 
in the narrowness of articulated opinion and analysis* The critic must 
also be prepared to face a defamation apparatus against which there is 
little recourse, an inhibiting factor that is not insubstantial. Many such 
factors exist, related to the essential structural features brought to light 
by a propaganda model but nevertheless worthy of derailed examina- 
tion in themselves. The result is a powerful system of induced conform¬ 
ity to the needs of privilege and power. 

In sum, the mass media of the United States are effective and power¬ 
ful ideological institutions that carry out a system-supportive propa¬ 
ganda function by reliance on market forces, internalized assumptions, 
and self-censorship, and without significant overt coercion. This propa¬ 
ganda system has become even more efficient in recent decades with the 
rise of the national television networks, greater mass-media concentra¬ 
tion, right-wing pressures on public radio and television, and the 
growth in scope and sophistication of public relations and news man¬ 
agement* 

This system is not all-powerful, however* Government and elite 
domination of the media have not succeeded in overcoming the Viet¬ 
nam syndrome and public hostility to direct U.S. involvement in the 
destabilization and overthrow of foreign governments, A massive Rea- 
gan-era disinformation and propaganda effort, reflecting in large mea¬ 
sure an elite consensus, did succeed in its major aims of mobilizing 
support for the U.S. terror states (the “fledgling democracies”), while 
