added] more than 30 years of military domination” ( Newsweek, Jan. 17, 
1986}. Dan Rather, on CBS News, reported that Cerezo became 
GuatemaJa’s “first civilian leader after thirty years of almost uninter¬ 
rupted military rule” (Dec. 9,1985), This is ambiguous, but the implica¬ 
tion, directly asserted by Newsweek, is that Cerezo, not the army, rules . 
Julio Mendez Montenegro was a civilian president from 1966 to 1970, 
but he did not rule, and he was eventually discredited by the fact that 
he presided over a huge escalation of army violence. Given the earlier 
experience, the fact that the generals had made it clear that the civilian 
government was “a project” of the military, 76 and Cerezo’s own ex¬ 
pressed reservations about his power, objective news reporting would 
have been careful about an alleged ending of military rule. 

As in the case of El Salvador, the murderous rule of the Guatemalan 
generals did not delegitimize them for the U.S. mass media nor suggest 
any possible justice to the rebel cause. Time noted (Feb. 27,1984) that 
a leftist insurgency “poses a permanent challenge to the regime,” but 
it did not inquire into the roots of this insurgency or suggest that its 
leaders constituted a “main opposition” whose ability to run would be 
an “acid test” of election integrity (as they pronounced in Nicaragua). 
Time also did not observe that the regime poses a permanent challenge 
to the survival of its population. The mass murders of the Guatemalan 
state were even semi-justified by the unquestioned need to quell insur¬ 
gents—“Much of the killing,” says Time, “is linked to Mejia’s success 
against the insurgents.” The phrase “linked to” is an apologetic euphe¬ 
mism to obscure the fact that Mejia’s “success” was based on the mass 
murder of men, women, and children in literally hundreds of destroyed 
villages. 77 Mejia has a “mixed record,” with the mass murder offset by 
“improvements in some important areas” (the State Department, 
quoted by Time). Mejia, says Time, “won support because he has kept 
the promises he made after seizing power.” Time never explains how 
it determined that Mejia “won support,” or from whom, other than the 
U.S. State Department. Was the press then free to speak out? Did a 
system of justice come into being? 

In chapter 2 we summarized Americas Watch’s demonstration that 
the Reagan administration made serial adjustments in its apologetics for 
each successive Guatemalan terrorist general, with a lagged, tacit ac¬ 
knowledgment that it had previously been lying . This has no influence 
whatsoever on Time's treatment of State Department pronouncements 
as authentic truth—the standard from which other claims may be eval¬ 
uated. Thus Time says that “Americas Warch, a controversial group 



112 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


that is often accused of being too sympathetic to the left, called 
Guatemala 'a nation of prisoners/ ” Time doesn’t independently evalu¬ 
