cion and bias in which the rebels could not run, and then use this for 
the dramatic game of disruption and triumphant turnout. That the 
military agreed to the election because it couldn't lose was never sug¬ 
gested by these media. 

The role of the army was summarized by Warren Hoge in the New 
York Times: 

Is the military playing any role in the election? Members of the 
military are not allowed to vote* and the armed forces are pledged 
to protect voters from violence and to respect the outcome of the 
contest, 71 

We may note that the army’s mass killing of civilians and systematic 
destruction and demobilization of virtually all popular organizations in 
El Salvador over the preceding thirty months* which bears on what 
Secretary of State Shultz referred to as the “preliminary aspects that 
make an election mean something/ 1 is not part of the army's “role” for 
Hoge and the Times ■ Hoge repeats the Salvadoran army’s pledge, not 
only taking it at face value, but never suggesting that it (and the election 
itself) was meaningless in a terror state where the “main opposition” 
was off the ballot and only the war parties were able to field candidates. 
In the propaganda framework, the security forces of client states “pro¬ 
tect elections”/ 2 only those of enemy states interfere with the freedom 
of its citizens to vote without constraint . 

As noted earlier* observers and reporters in El Salvador all agreed 
that the populace was most eager for an end to the war, and government 
propaganda even stressed that voting was an important vehicle to that 
end—the public was urged to substitute “ballots for bullets.” But no 
peace party was on the Salvadoran ballot. And after the election was 
over, the war went on* and the death squads continued to flourish. This 
is in accordance with the hypothesis that the real purpose of the elec¬ 
tion was to placate the home population of the United States and render 
them willing to fund more war and terror. It is a poor fit to the hypothe¬ 
sis that the people of El Salvador had a free choice. An honest press 
would point up the failure of the election to substitute “ballots for 
bullets,” The mass media of the United States did not raise the issue. 

Nor did the experience of 1982 and its aftermath affect the media’s 



iio manufacturing consent 


willingness to follow the patriotic agenda once again in 1984, We will 
return to this below in a statistical comparison of the New York Times 's 
coverage of the Salvadoran and Nicaraguan elections* 

