the “national debate” preceding the congressional votes on contra aid, not a 
single one mentioned this elementary fact. For a detailed review, see Noam 
Chomsky, “Introduction,” in Morris Morley and James Petras, The Reagan 
Administration and Nicaragua, Monograph 1 (New York: Institute for Media 
Analysis, 1987). 

9. Only two phrases in the eighty-five opinion columns cited in the previous 
footnote mentioned that the Nicaraguan government had carried out reforms; 
none of them compared Nicaragua with El Salvador and Guatemala on this 
important question. 

10. See Dianna Melrose, Nicaragua: The Threat of a Good Example? (Oxford: 
Oxfam, 1985); see also chapters 3, 5, and 7, below. 

11. In an article highly critical of the Reagan “peace plan” for Nicaragua in 
August 1987, Tom Wicker says, “Whatever his doctrine, the United States has 
no historic or God-given right to bring democracy to other nations; nor does 
such a purpose justify the overthrow of governments it does not like” (“That 
Dog Won’t Hunt,” New York Times, Aug. 6,1987). Wicker does not contest 
the claim that Reagan seeks democracy in Nicaragua; it is just that his means 
are dubious and his plan won’t work. We should note that Wicker is at the 
outer limits of expressible dissident opinion in the U.S. mass media. See 
further, chapter 3. For additional references and discussion, see Chomsky, 
Culture of Terrorism . 

12. For example, in response to the Guatemala peace accords of August 1987, 
the United States immediately escalated the supply flights required to keep its 
forces in Nicaragua in the field to the phenomenal level of two to three per 
day. The purpose was to undermine the accords by intensifying the fighting, 



NOTES TO PAGES 4-5 335 


334 NOTES TO PAGES xiii—3 


and to prevent Nicaragua from relaxing its guard so that it could be accused 
of failing to comply with the accords. These U.S. initiatives were by far the 
most serious violations of the accords, but they were virtually unmentioned in 
the media. For a detailed review, see Noam Chomsky, “Is Peace at Hand?” 
Z magazine (January 1988). 

13. Jacques Ellul, Propaganda (New York: Knopf, 1965), pp. 58-59. 

14. A careful reader of the Soviet press could learn facts about the war in Af¬ 
ghanistan that controvert the government line—see chapter 5, pp. 226-27— but 
these inconvenient facts would not be considered in the West to demonstrate 
the objectivity of the Soviet press and the adequacy of its coverage of this issue. 
