The U.S. mass media, however, followed the Bushnell formula virtu¬ 
ally without deviation: there was a “civil war between extreme right and 
leftist groups” (New York Times, Feb. 25, 1980); the “seemingly well 
meaning but weak junta” was engaging in reforms but was unable to 
check the terror (Time, Apr. 7, 1980). The U.S. mass media had fea- 



WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS $1 


tured heavily the reformist character of the revolutionary junta* but 
they uniformly suppressed evidence of the powerlessness* frustrations* 
and early resignation of the progressives* and their replacement by 
civilians willing to serve as “front men” for state terror* Roman 
Mayorga, an engineer and university professor who had been the unani¬ 
mous choice of the original coup plotters, resigned on January 3,1980* 
along with Guillermo Manuel Ungo “and at least 37 of the highest 
ranking government officials, including the heads of all government 
agencies.” 26 But for the media, these events never happened, and the 
junta was still a “weak centrist government * * * beset by implacable 
extremes” (New York Times editorial* Apr* 28* 1980)* not a right-wing 
government of massacre* Robin K. Andersen points out that 

None of the networks reported . * * the final resignation of the 
junta members* Even CBS* which had reported at length on the 
appointment of Roman Mayorga* failed to report his resignation, 
or any of the others. For television news viewers, these political 
developments never happened. Television news coverage omitted 
every reference to this all-important political power struggle that 
could have accounted for the abuses that continued* * * * The 
civilian lack of control, and even their resignation, had no effect 
on the way in which the news characterized the junta; it continued 
to be labeled moderate. 27 

And the Salvadoran government has continued to be “moderate” and 
“centrist” up to today. 

Other media suppressions aided in bolstering the myth of the neutral 
junta standing between the extreme right and the extreme left. On 
March 29,1980, the New York Times carried a Reuters dispatch noting 
the resignation of three high Salvadoran officials, who* according to the 
article, “resigned last night in protest against the juntas inability to halt 
violence by leftist and rightist forces*” 3 ® The preceding day, an AP 
dispatch recorded the same resignations, but without any explanation 
of the reasons for this. One of the resigning officials. Undersecretary 
of Agriculture Jorge Alberto Villacorta* issued a public statement say¬ 
ing that 

I resigned because 1 believed that it was useless to continue in a 
government not only incapable of putting an end to the violence, 
but a government which itself is generating the political violence 
through repression*, *, Recently, in one of the large estates taken 
over by the agrarian reform, uniformed members of the security 



52 manufacturing consent 


forces accompanied by a masked person pointed out the directors 
<jf the self-management group and then these individuals were 
shot in front of their co-workers* 29 

It can be seen from the statement that the reference in the Reuter’s 
dispatch to protest “against the junta’s inability to halt violence by 
leftist and rightist forces” is a gross misrepresentation* and it is evident 
that an honest transmission of Villacorta’s statement would have con¬ 
tradicted the propaganda line* 

At Archbishop Romero’s funeral, on March 30, 1980, where many 
thousands gathered to pay tribute, bomb explosions and gunfire killed 
some forty people and injured hundreds more* The version of the event 
provided by U.S. Ambassador Robert White and the Salvadoran gov¬ 
ernment was that “armed terrorists of the ultra left sowed panic among 
the masses and did all they could to provoke the security forces into 
returning fire. But the discipline of the armed forces held.” 30 Joseph 
Treaster’s account in the New York Times quotes Duarte that the 
violence was from the left It also quotes a junta statement that the army 
was strictly confined to its barracks, and Treaster says, “There was no 
sign of uniformed government forces in the plaza before or during the 
shooting.” No other version of the facts is mentioned. However, a 
mimeographed statement on March 30, signed by twenty-two church 
leaders present at the funeral, claimed that the panic had been started 
by a bomb thrown from the national palace, followed by machine-gun 
and other shots coming from its second floor. 31 This account was sup¬ 
pressed by Treaster and was never mentioned in the New York Times. 

In a follow-up article of April 7,1980, Treaster repeats that on March 
30 the junta ordered all military forces into their barracks, and that they 
obeyed “even though they knew leftists with weapons were pouring into 
the central plaza.” Treaster asserts this government claim as fact, and 
he continues to suppress sources and evidence that contradict this 
government allegation. He also fails to explain why the leftists would 
indiscriminately shoot their own people paying homage to the arch¬ 
bishop. 32 

The title of Treaster’s article of April 7,1980, is “Slaying in Salvador 
Backfires on Rebels.” The article reads as follows: 

