

election-day process, and made no threats against Salvadoran voters. But as 
in 1982, this has no impact on Time reporting. The real threats, broadcast to 
voters in Nicaragua by contra radio, and the several contra killings of poll 
watchers, were never reported by Time . 

As we have noted, the stress on superficialities like long lines is part of the 
propaganda agenda for a demonstration election. So is blacking out the fact 
that the length of the lines might be a function of the restricted number of 
voting booths, as was the case in El Salvador. Time provides both the emphasis 
on long lines and the suppression of relevant evidence on why the lines were 
so long. See Herman and Brodhead, Demonstration Elections , pp. 126-27. 

91. Cruz was mentioned by Kinzer in eleven, and quoted, usually at some 
length, in five, of the fourteen articles he wrote on the Nicaraguan election; 
disruption and harassment are mentioned or featured in seven of the articles. 

92. See particularly his “Sandinista Is Favored but Runs Hard” (Oct. 30, 
1984), “Going Through the Motions in Nicaragua” (Nov. 4), and “Sandinistas 
Hold Their First Elections” (Nov. 5). 

93. We will see below that Time even tries to make out a coercive threat that 
produced the vote in Nicaragua. 

94. See the quotation from Warren Hoge given above, on p. 108. 

95. These points were discussed in the LASA report, as we note below, but 
for Kinzer and the rest of the mass media, they were off the agenda. 

96. Note that the exact opposite is true in the United States, reflecting the 
recognition on the part of the general public in both societies of who stands 
to gain through the electoral process. 

97. The rate was, in fact, far higher than in the 1984 U.S. presidential election, 
in which just over half the electorate participated. 

98. “Sandinistas Hold Their First Election,” New York Times , November 5, 
1984. 

99. Duarte is quoted to this effect by Edward Schumacher in the New York 
Times , February 21, 1981. 

100. On April 23,1985, the Wall Street Journal revealed that Cruz was on the 
CIA payroll. Oliver North then took over his financing, hoping that this might 
divert attention from the fact that Cruz had been funded by the CIA during 
the period when the U.S. government was trying to discredit the Nicaraguan 
elections. See Stephen Engelberg, New York Times, July 15, 1987. 

101. Stephen Kinzer, “Ex-Contra Looks Back Finding Much to Regret,” New 
