head of state Bulent Ecevit even accused Henze of helping destabilize 
Turkey during his term of operations there. 37 Henze never refers in his 
“news” articles to his active participation in Turkish affairs as a CIA 
official. His writings are notable for their consistent apologetics for 
military rule in Turkey, for their dishonesty, 38 and for the fact that 
Henze openly disdains the use of rules of evidence in proving Soviet 
villainy. 39 

Michael Ledeen, as we saw in chapter i, contends that the mass 
media believe Qaddafi more readily than the U.S. government, and 
focus more heavily on the victims of state terror in U.S. client states 
(Indonesia in East Timor, and Guatemala?) than in enemy and radical 
states (Cambodia and Poland?). Again, such absurdities do not reduce 
Ledeen's access to the mass media as an expert on the Bulgarian Con¬ 
nection, or on anything else. 40 

The mass media not only allowed these disinformation sources to 
prevail, they protected them against disclosures that would reveal their 
dubious credentials. That Henze was a longtime CIA official was almost 
never mentioned in the press (never, to our knowledge, on television), 
and his consistent apologetics for the Turkish military regime and 
frequent lies were never disclosed. In Sterling's case, her numerous 
errors of fact, foolish arguments, and wilder political opinions were not 
disclosed to readers of the New York Times, Time, or Newsweek, or 
watchers of CBS News or the “McNeil-Lehrer News Hour,” and even 
“newsworthy” matters bearing on her qualifications were ignored. For 
example. Sterling's numerous attacks on the murdered French activist- 
radical Henry Curiel resulted in suits for slander brought against her 
in Paris. The New York Times has never mentioned these slander suits, 
which would put Sterling in a bad light not only because she lost them 
in whole or part, but also because of the insight they provide concerning 
her sources and methods. Sterling had gotten much of her information 
from a French journalist, George Suffert, who was a conduit for French 
and South African intelligence, and who had obligingly placed the 
African National Congress at the top of his list of “terrorist” organiza¬ 
tions. In her Terror Network, Sterling strongly intimates that Curiel was 
a KGB agent, but the French court, on the basis of documents provided 
by French intelligence, found no support for this claim. Sterling re¬ 
treated to the defense that her insinuation of CuriePs KGB connection 
was merely a “hypothesis” rather than an assertion of fact. The case, 
in short, showed that she was a conduit of disinformation, quite pre- 



THE KGB-BULGAR1AN PLOT TO KILL THE POPE l6l 


pared to slander a murdered radical on the basis of claims by extreme 
right-wing disinformation sources. 

Michael Ledeen, a neoconservative activist and disinformationist* 
with ready access to the Times 3 has also received its close protection. 
His book Grave New World was reviewed in the Times by William 
Griffith* a Reader's Digest “roving editor” and right-wing MIT political 
scientist who found Ledeen’s version of the Bulgarian Connection 
entirely convincing. 41 Ledeen was deeply involved with Francesco Pa- 
zienza in the “Billygate” affair and had numerous contacts with Italian 
intelligence and the Italian extreme right. The Italian Fascist and head 
of P-2* Licio Gelli, hiding in Uruguay* instructed one of his accom¬ 
plices to convey a manuscript to Ledeen. Pazienza claimed (and SISMI 
head Santovito confirmed) that Ledeen was a member of the Italian 
intelligence agency SISMI, with code number Z-3. Ledeen received 
over $100,000 from SISMI for services rendered* including the supply¬ 
ing of stale U.S. intelligence reports that SISMI then passed off as its 
own. Ledeen funneled this money into a Bermuda bank account. His 
manipulative activities in Italy were on such a scale that in the summer 
of 1984 a newly appointed head of SISMI told the Italian parliament 
that Ledeen was a “meddler” and persona non grata in Italy. 42 None of 
these points was ever disclosed in the Times, 4 * 


4.6. THE PROPAGANDA 
AGENDA: QUESTIONS 
UNASKED, SOURCES UNTAPPED 

There is a close linkage among sources used, frames of reference, and 
agendas of the newsworthy. When the mass media chose to use Sterling, 
Henze* and Ledeen heavily, they simultaneously adopted a frame of 
reference in which the Bulgarians and Soviets were presumed guilty, 
Agca was an apolitical mercenary* and justice was being promoted by 
diligent Judge Martella in free-world Italy. In the propaganda cam¬ 
paign that ensued, hard questions about the quality of the SHK model 
were simply not asked, and alternative sources and frames were ig¬ 
nored, 

A distinction between matters on and off the agenda, such as we used 
in the previous chapter, is once again applicable and illuminating, “On 
the agenda” are statements by Agca and Martella about Agca’s latest 


1 


162 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 

claims and proofs of Bulgarian involvement, Brzezinski’s opinion on 
whether the Bulgarians are likely to have engaged in such an escapade 
(they were), or Judy Woodruffs question to Paul Henze as to whether 
the Soviets "‘would have any notion, any desire to try this again” (they 
do this kind of thing all the time—just got a little careless here because 
