

the fact that Agca didn't seem to have been registered as a member of 
the Gray Wolves. 14 But all his friends* associates* and affiliations from 
high school days onward were Gray Wolves* and in his travels through 
Europe up to the time of his May 13* 1981, rendezvous* he moved solely 
through the Gray Wolves network. While in prison* Agca addressed a 
letter to Alparslan Turkes* the leader of the Nationalist Action Party 
of Turkey* expressing his continued commitment and loyalty. This 
letter was bothersome to Sterling and Henze as it is inconsistent with 
their depiction of Agca as apolitical, and Sterling dismissed it without 
argument as a “laughably clumsy forgery.” A problem* however* is that 
Agca's letter was introduced as evidence in a trial in Ankara by the 
Turkish military authorities* usually adequate proof for Sterling of 
authenticity. She doesn’t mention this fact or examine their case. Ugur 
Mumcu devotes five pages of his book Agca Dossier to a detailed ac¬ 
count of the Turkes letter* describing the great pains the authorities 
took* including tapping outside experts, to establish its authenticity. 
The conclusion on all sides was that the letter was genuine. 

A fourth problem with the SHK model is the notion that because of 
the efficiency of the Bulgarian secret police, Agca's presence in Sofia 
must have been known to them* and he must therefore have been on 
their payroll. This assumed efficiency is an ideological assumption un¬ 
supported by any evidence and contradicted by actual Bulgarian and 
Soviet performance. There is no evidence that the Bulgarians ever 
identified Agca, who was using a false passport. Furthermore, the con¬ 
tention that the Bulgarian police know everything was refuted in impor¬ 
tant testimony during the Rome trial on September 22* 1985, when Gray 
Wolves official Abdullah Catli stated that many Gray Wolves preferred 
to traverse Bulgaria because it was easy to hide in the large flow of 
Turkish immigrant traffic through that country. 

A fifth problem for the SHK model was the fact that Agca seems to 
have gotten his gun through the Gray Wolves network, not from the 
Bulgarians, who presumably could have slipped it to him quite easily 
in Rome. In her Reader’s Digest article. Sterling traced Agca's gun to 
Horst Grillmaier, an Austrian gun dealer who, according to Sterling, 
had fled behind the Iron Curtain after May 13,1981* to avoid question¬ 
ing in the West. It turned out later, however* that Grillmaier was a 
former Nazi who specialized in supplying right-wing gun buyers; that 
he had not disappeared behind the Iron Curtain at all; and that the gun 
had proceeded through a number of intermediaries, to be transmitted 
to Agca by a Gray Wolves friend- Sterling handles the disintegration 
of the original Grillmaier line by simply shifting to a new conspiratorial 



150 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 

