
The difference between the murder of the four women and the 



worthy and unworthy victims 6i 


thousands of others uninvestigated and unresolved in El Salvador was 
that the families of these victims were Americans and pressed the case* 
eventually succeeding in getting Congress to focus on these particular 
murders as a test case and political symbol. This forced these killings 
onto the political agenda. A trial and convictions were ultimately re¬ 
quired as a condition for certification and aid to the military govern¬ 
ment of El Salvador. Both the Reagan administration and the 
Salvadoran military were thus obligated to “see justice done”—in this 
one instance. It took three-and-a-half years for justice to triumph in 
this one case* with a lid still kept on top-level involvement. It was a 
challenge to the mass media to present these murders* and the delayed 
and aborted outcome* in such a way as to keep indignation low and to 
downplay the quality of a system that murdered the women and had 
to be forced to find a set of low-level personnel guilty of the crime 
(which it took them years to do). The media met this challenge with 
flying colors. 


2,4,1* Details of the savagery 

The finding of Popieluszko's body was front-page news for the New 
York Times —in fact* the initial fa ilure to find his body made the front 
page—and in all the media publications analyzed here* the details of 
his seizure* the disposition of his body, and the nature of his wounds 
were recounted extensively and with barely concealed relish (see table 
2-2). These details were also repeated at every opportunity (and, most 
notably* at the trial). The finding of the bodies of the four women* by 
contrast, was a back-page item in the Times, and in all four of the media 
institutions in our sample the accounts of the violence done to the four 
murdered women were very succinct, omitted many details, and were 
not repeated after the initial disclosures. No attempt was made to 
reconstruct the scene with its agony and brutal violence* so that the 
drama conveyed in the accounts of Popieluszko’s murder was entirely 
missing. The murder of the four churchwomen was made remote and 
impersonal. 

The Time account, for example* after giving the names of the vic¬ 
tims* says, “Two of the women had been raped before being shot in the 
back of the head.” The New York Times account, shown in table 2-2, 
is also quite succinct. The Rogers Commission report pointed out that 
one of the victims had been shot through the back of the head with a 
weapon “that left exit wounds that destroyed her face.” The Rogers 




62 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


report also noted that those present at the disinterment found “exten¬ 
sive” wounds and that “the bodies were also bruised,” Raymond Bon¬ 
ner's account in Weakness and Deceit, noted that 

In the crude grave, stacked on top of each other were the bodies 
of four women. The first hauled out of the hole was Jean Donovan, 
twenty-seven years old, a lay missionary from Cleveland. Her face 
had been blown away by a high calibre bullet that had been fired 
into the back of her head. Her pants were unzipped; her under- 
* wear twisted around her ankles. When area peasants found her, 
she was nude from the waist down. They had tried to replace the 
garments before burial. Then came Dorothy Kazel, a forty-year- 
old Ursuline nun also from Cleveland. At the bottom of the pit 
were Maryknoll nuns Ita Ford, forty, and Maura Clarke, forty- 
nine, both from New York, Ail the women had been executed at 
close range. The peasants who found the women said that one had 
her underpants stuffed in her mouth; another's had been tied over 
her eyes. All had been raped. 

We may note the failure of Time and the New York Times to mention 
the bruises {which both of these publications mentioned and repeated, 
as regards Popieluszko); the failure to mention the destruction of Jean 
Donovan's face; the suppression of the degrading and degraded use of 
the nuns' underwear; 54 the failure to give the account of the peasants 
who found the bodies. These and other details given by Bonner and 
suppressed by Time and the New York Times (and also Newsweek and 
CBS News) add emotional force and poignancy to the scene. Such 
details are included for a Popieluszko, but not for four American 
women murdered by a U.S. client state. The Rogers report also pointed 
out that the forensic surgeons sent to the scene of the crime by the 
junta, at the urging of Ambassador Robert White, refused to perform 
an autopsy on the ground that no surgical masks were available. This 
touch, which would have cast the junta and its agents in a bad light, 
was also omitted from U.S. media accounts. 

In the Popieluszko case, both the finding of the body and the trial 
were occasions for an aggressive portrayal of the details of the act of 
murder and the condition of the body. The mass-media reticence on 
such matters at the time of the finding of the bodies of the four women 
was exceeded by their restraint at the trial. Lydia Chavez, of the New 
York Times, who attended the trial, notes that there were eight hours 
of testimony and seven hours of argument that focused on the women's 
work in El Salvador “and on the details of their kidnappings and 
