mobilizing interest and outrage* In the opinion columns, we would 
anticipate sharp restraints on the range of opinion allowed expression. 
Our hypothesis is that worthy victims will be featured prominently and 
dramatically, that they will be humanized, and that their victimization 
will receive the detail and context in story construction that will gener¬ 
ate reader interest and sympathetic emotion. In contrast, unworthy 
victims will merit only slight detail, minimal humanization, and little 
context that will excite and enrage* 

Meanwhile, because of the power of establishment sources, the flak 
machines, and anti-Communist ideology, we would anticipate outcries 
that the worthy victims are being sorely neglected, that the unworthy 
are treated with excessive and uncritical generosity, 132 that the media’s 
liberal, adversarial (if not subversive) hostility to government explains 
Our difficulties in mustering support for the latest national venture in 
counterrevolutionary intervention. 

In sum, a propaganda approach to media coverage suggests a system¬ 
atic and highly political dichotomization in news coverage based on 
serviceability to important domestic power interests. This should be 
observable in dichotomized choices of story and in the volume and 
quality of coverage. In the chapters that follow we will see that such 
dichotomization in the mass media is massive and systematic: not only 
are choices for publicity and suppression comprehensible in terms of 
system advantage, but the modes of handling favored and inconvenient 
materials (placement, tone, context, fullness of treatment) differ in ways 
that serve political ends. 





Worthy and 
Unworthy Victims 


A PROPAGANDA SYSTEM WILL CONSISTENTLY PORTRAY PEOPLE 

abused in enemy states as worthy victims, whereas those treated with 
equal or greater severity by its own government or clients will be 
unworthy . The evidence of worth may be read from the extent and 
character of attention and indignation. We will show in this chapter that 
the U,S* mass media's practical definitions of worth are political in the 
extreme and fit well the expectations of a propaganda model. While this 
differential treatment occurs on a large scale, the media, intellectuals, 
and public are able to remain unconscious of the fact and maintain a 
high moral and self-righteous tone. This is evidence of an extremely 
effective propaganda system. 


2.1. JERZY* POPIELUSZKO 
VERSUS A HUNDRED RELIGIOUS 
VICTIMS IN LATIN AMERICA 

A useful comparison can be made between the mass media’s treatment 
of Jerzy Popieluszko, a Polish priest murdered by the Polish police in 



38 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


October 1984* and the media’s coverage of priests murdered within the 
ILS, sphere of influence. In our model* Popieluszko, murdered in an 
enemy state* will be a worthy victim* whereas priests murdered in our 
client states in Latin America will be unworthy. The former may be 
expected to elicit a propaganda outburst by the mass media; the latter 
will not generate sustained coverage. 


2.1,1. Quantitative aspects of 
coverage. 

Table 2-1 shows* on row 1* the coverage of Popieluszko’s murder and 
the trial of his murderers by the New York Times, Time and Newsweek, 
and CBS News. Rows 2 through 5 summarize the coverage in the same 
media given to religious personnel murdered in Latin America by 
agents of U.S* client states: 1 Row 2 shows the coverage given seventy- 
two individuals in a list of Latin American religious “martyrs” named 
by Penny Lernoux in her book Cry of the People ; row 3 describes media 
coverage of twenty-three priests, missionaries* and other religious 
workers murdered in Guatemala between January 1980 and February 
1985. Row 4 summarizes the coverage of the murder of Archbishop 
Oscar Romero* of El Salvador, shot by an assassin in March 1980* Row 
5 shows the level of media coverage of four U.S. women religious 
workers* murdered in El Salvador in December 1980. 

The coverage of the Popieluszko murder not only dwarfs that of the 
unworthy victims, it constitutes a major episode of news management 
and propaganda. Nothing comparable can be found for victims within 
the free world. 2 It can be seen that the New York Times featured the 
Popieluszko case on its front page on ten different occasions* and the 
intensity of coverage assured that its readers would know who Popie¬ 
luszko was* that he had been murdered* and that this sordid violence 
had occurred in a Communist state. By contrast* the public would not 
have seen mention of the names of Father Augusto Ramirez Monast- 
erio* father superior of the Franciscan order in Guatemala, murdered 
in November 1983* or Father Miguel Angel Montufar* a Guatemalan 
priest who disappeared in the same month that Popieluszko was killed 
in Poland* or literally dozens of other religious murder victims in the 
