few cities, were implicitly depicted as callously destroying all Vietnam . . ., 
while the Vietcong’s indiscriminate use of their own firepower, as well as the 
Hue killings, were largely overlooked” (I, 286). The dominant themes in the 
media “added up to a portrait of defeat for the allies” (I, 705). “At Tet, the 
press shouted that the patient was dying” (I, 714). And so on. 

We have already cited enough to show how much merit there is in these 
characterizations. Furthermore, as already indicated, the media reports gener¬ 
ally conformed to those of the U.S. military, although they were often less 
extreme in suggesting enemy success, as we have seen. Braestrup is not un¬ 
aware of this. He writes, for example, that “MACV spokesmen in Saigon 
themselves contributed in February to a general journalistic perception that 
no logistics, organizational, or manpower limitations inhibited the NVA’s ca¬ 
pacity, even after the ‘first wave,’ to strike anywhere at will (‘No place was safe 
any more’)” (I, 190). Furthermore, “most eyewitness combat reporting, rare 
and restricted as it was, showed up better in February than the MACV com¬ 
muniques or the communique rewrites in Saigon” ( 1 ,334). In fact, the military 
briefings cited are closely similar to media commentary in basic content, e.g., 
Brigadier General John Chaisson, February 3, who described “a real battle,” 
“a very successful offensive in its initial phases,” “surprisingly well coor¬ 
dinated,” “surprisingly intensive,” conducted with “a surprising amount of 
audacity”—for example, in Hu6, where “the VC had the town,” etc. Naturally 



330 APPENDIX 3 


the media varied more widely in content and style, but characterizations of the 
sort cited above must simply be dismissed as hysteria, even apart from the 
numerous misrepresentations and sheer fabrications. 

If this is one of the great achievements of contemporary scholarship, as John 
Roche claims, then scholarship is in a bad way indeed. 


Notes 


Preface 

1. We use the term “special interests” in its commonsense meaning, not in the 
Orwellian usage of the Reagan era, where it designates workers, farmers, 
women, youth, blacks, the aged and infirm, the unemployed—in short, the 
population at large. Only one group did not merit this appellation: corpora¬ 
tions, and their owners and managers. They are not “special interests,” they 
represent the “national interest.” This terminology represents the reality of 
domination and the operational usage of “national interest” for the two major 
political parties. For a similar view, with evidence of the relevance of this usage 
to both major political parties, see Thomas Ferguson and Joel Rogers, Right 
Turn: The Decline of the Democrats and the Future of American Politics (New 
York: Hill and Wang, 1986), pp. 37-39 and passim. 

2. Herbert Gans, for example, states that “The beliefs that actually make it 
into the news are professional values that are intrinsic to national journalism 
and that journalists learn on the job... . The rules of news judgment call for 
ignoring story implications ...” (“Are U.S. Journalists Dangerously Liberal?” 
Columbia Journalism Review [Nov.-Dee. 1985], pp. 32-33). In his book Decid¬ 
ing What’s News (New York: Vintage, 1980), Gans contends that media report- 




iw i t>«i iv/ i a vj c J A1 All 


notes to pages xii-xiii 333 


ers are by and large “objective,” but within a framework of beliefs in a set of 
“enduring values” that include “ethnocentrism” and “responsible capitalism,” 
among others. We would submit that if reporters for Pravda were found to 
operate within the constraints of belief in the essential justice of the Soviet 
state and “responsible communism,” this would be found to make any further 
discussion of “objectivity” pointless. Furthermore, as we shall document 
below, Gans greatly understates the extent to which media reporters work 
within a limiting framework of assumptions. 

3. Neoconservative critiques of the mass media commonly portray them as 
bastions of liberal, antiestablishment attacks on the system. They ignore the 
fact that the mass media are large business corporations controlled by very 
wealthy individuals or other corporations, and that the members of what the 
neoconservatives describe as the “liberal culture” of the media are hired 
employees. They also disregard the fact that the members of this liberal culture 
generally accept the basic premises of the system and differ with other mem¬ 
bers of the establishment largely on the tactics appropriate to achieving com¬ 
mon ends. The neoconservatives are simply not prepared to allow deviations 
from their own views. In our analysis in chapter 1, we describe them as playing 
the important role of “enforcers,” attempting to browbeat the media into 
excluding from a hearing even the limited dissent now tolerated. For an 
analysis of the neoconservative view of the media, see Edward S. Herman and 
Frank Brodhead, “Ledeen on the Media,” in The Rise and Fall of the Bulgarian 
Connection (New York: Sheridan Square Publications, 1986), pp. 166-70; 
George Gerbner, “Television: The Mainstreaming of America,” in Business 
and the Media, Conference Report, Yankelovich, Skelly and White, November 
19, 1981; Gans, “Are U.S. Journalists Dangerously Liberal?” 

4. See Walter Lippmann, Public Opinion (1921; reprint, London: Allen & 
Unwin, 1932); Harold Lasswell, “Propaganda,” in Encyclopedia of the Social 
Sciences (New York: Macmillan, 1933); Edward Bemays, Propaganda (New 
