news articles of the same period convey the same message—one of them 
is entitled “After 30 Years Democracy Gets a Chance in Guatemala” 
(Nov. io, 1985)—which accurately summarizes the contents, although 
they contain an undercurrent of reserved final judgment. That central 
message was false, however, if the basic conditions of a free election 
were not met, if the army's power remained unimpaired, and if these 
were confirmed in a written constitution that allows the army freedom 
from the rule of law and a license to kill without constraint from the 
nominal “democracy.” 53 Kinzer could only convey this false message 
by ignoring the Sagastume case, the institutional arrangements of the 
counterinsurgency state, the ongoing murders, and the omnipresent 
fear—i.e., the basic conditions of a free election—and by laying stress 
instead on expressions of hope, orderliness of the election processes, 
and army promises—i.e., the government's propaganda agenda in a 
demonstration election. 

In what must be one of the low points of his journalistic career, in 
an article of December 27,1985 (“Guatemala Vote Heartens Nicaragua 
Parties”), Kinzer even implies that the Guatemala election establishes 
an electoral model for Nicaragua. He describes a Cerezo visit to Nicara¬ 
gua, in which Kinzer features the encouragement Cerezo gives to the 
dissident parties that perhaps the power of the Sandinistas can be 
broken by patience (implying that Cerezo had broken the power of the 
army in Guatemala and was in full command). The article closes with 
a quote from an opposition figure: “Ortega is now the last President in 
Central America who wears a military uniform, and the contrast is 
going to be evident.” Nowhere in the article does Kinzer point out that 
army power can not be read from whether the head of state wears a 
uniform, or that the rule of the army in Guatemala has not yet been 
overcome. He does not refer to the fact that the Guatemalan army has 
killed tens of thousands of ordinary civilians. Nor does he show any 
recognition of the fact that the election held in Nicaragua was much 
more open than that held in Guatemala, On the contrary, this is a fact 
that the media, including the New York Times, explicitly and consis¬ 
tently deny, in accordance with state imperatives. 

As in the case of El Salvador, the U.S. mass media never suggested 
that the exclusion of the Guatemalan insurgent groups rendered the 
Guatemalan election meaningless. Kinzer several times mentioned with 





II 6 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


extreme brevity that the left was off the ballot, but he never asked 
anybody to discuss the meaning of this in terms of the options available 
to the various segments of society. As coauthor of an important book 
