

INTRODUCTION XXVU 


was evident in reporting on the March 2000 Russian election* won by 
Yeltsin's anointed heir and former KGB operative Vladimir Putin. Putin 
had built his popularity by conducting a brutal counterinsurgency war 
against Chechnya* and his electoral success rested heavily on the fact that 
the powerful state TV and radio stations campaigned furiously on his 
behalf and denigrated and gave no broadcasting time to his opponents. 
A September 2000 expose of the Putin election campaign by the expatri¬ 
ate Moscow Times , based on a six-month investigative effort* uncovered 
compelling evidence of election fraud* including ballot stuffing, ballot 
destruction* and the creation of 1.3 million “dead souls” inflating the 
election rolls. 50 The US. mainstream media, however* never found any 
evidence of fraud at the time of the election, and they have been reluctant 
to report the findings of the Moscow Times study. 51 Putin is another “re¬ 
former,” like Yeltsin* supported by the West, so that it follows once again 
that for the mainstream media a flawed election—hardly admitted to be 
flawed—remains better than none. 52 


The KGB-Bulgarian Plot to 
Assassinate the Pope 

During the Reagan era (1981-88)* there was a concerted effort to demo¬ 
nize the Soviet Union* in order to support a major arms buildup and a 
new* more aggressive policy in the Third World and globally. The Soviet 
Union was described as an “Evil Empire” and accused of sponsoring in¬ 
ternational terrorism as well as abusing its own and client-nation peo¬ 
ples. 53 When the would-be assassin Mehmet Ali Agca shot Pope John 
Paul II in Rome in May 1981* this provided the basis for one of the most 
successful propaganda campaigns of the Cold War era. 

Although the pope's assailant was a Turkish fascist and member of a 
violently anti-left party in Turkey* after a seventeen-month stint in an 
Italian prison Agca “confessed” that he had been hired by the KGB and 
Bulgarians. This confession was convenient, fitting well the interests of 
the dominant Italian parties anxious to discredit the powerful Italian 
Communist party as well as the Reagan administration's “Evil Empire” 
campaign. It was extremely suspicious for other reasons* coming so belat¬ 
edly* and after numerous visits to Agca by Italian secret service represen¬ 
tatives* judges* and papal agents* all with a political ax to grind, and with 
the secret service notorious for ideological extremism and willingness to 
d octor e vid ence. 5 4 

But the mainstream media accepted this story with astonishing gulli- 




XXV111 INTRODUCTION 


bility—the possibility of coaching and pressure on Agca to name the 
KGB and Bulgarians, much discussed in the Italian media, was almost 
never mentioned as even a theoretical possibility. And the weakness of the 
alleged Soviet motive, the sheer stupidity of the enterprise if Soviet- 
based, and the complete lack of confirmatory evidence was almost en¬ 
tirely ignored by the media (as described in chapter 4)* When the case 
was lost in an Italian court in 1986, despite a substantial Italian govern¬ 
ment investment and effort, for the IIS. mainstream media this merely 
reflected the peculiarities of the Italian system of justice; the continued 
absence of hard evidence led to no reassessment of the case or reflections 
on Their own role. 

In the years that followed, two developments threw some light on the 
case. One is that the Soviet and Bulgarian archives were opened up, and 
Allen Weinstein of the Center for Democracy gained permission from 
Bulgarian authorities in 1991 for members of his investigative commis¬ 
sion to look at the Bulgarian Interior Ministry's secret service files. After 
a stint in Bulgaria, Weinstein returned home having failed to locate any 
confirmatory evidence of Bulgarian or KGB involvement. The Los Ange¬ 
les TimeSy New York Times s Washington Post , Newsweek y and TimCy each of 
which had reported Weinstein's initiative and impending trip to Bulgaria 
in 1991, all failed to inform their readers of his negative findings. 55 

Later in 1991, at Senate hearings on the confirmation of Robert Gates 
as head of the CIA, former CIA officers Melvin Goodman and Harold 
Ford testified that the CIA's analysis of the Bulgarian Connection had 
been seriously compromised and politicized in support of the Reagan era 
anti-Soviet propaganda campaign. Goodman testified that not only had 
the CIA found no evidence of Soviet or Bulgarian involvement in the 
shooting, but that based on the CIA’s “very good penetration of the Bul¬ 
garian secret services” its professionals had concluded that a Bulgarian 
Connection did not exist. 56 

This testimony, which was a brutal coup de grace to the claims of a 
connection, put the media on the spot. It was now clear that in their 
enthusiastic support of the plot they had seriously misled their readers 
and performed badly as news purveyors and analysts, although serving 
well the propaganda needs of their government. But as in 1986, after 
the case against the Bulgarians was dismissed in an Italian court for in¬ 
sufficient evidence, none of them felt any obligation to explain their fail¬ 
ures and apologize to their readers. They reported the CIA revelations 
tersely, with some still claiming that while the connection had not been 
proved it had not been disproved either (ignoring the frequent impos¬ 
sibility of proving a negative). 57 But in general the mainstream media 

