

The enemy is operating with relative freedom in the countryside* 
probably recruiting heavily and no doubt infiltrating NVA units 
and personnel* His recovery is likely to be rapid; his supplies are 
adequate; and he is trying to maintain the momentum of his 
winter-spring offensive- . * - ARVN is now in a defensive posture 
around towns and cities and there is concern about how well they 
will bear up under sustained pressure. The initial attack nearly 
succeeded in a dozen places* and defeat in these places was only 
averted by the timely reaction of US forces* In short* it was a very 
near thing. There is no doubt that the RD Program [pacification] 
has suffered a severe set back. ... To a large extent the VC now 
control the countryside.. . . MACV estimates that US forces will 
be required in a number of places to assist and encourage the 
Vietnamese Army to leave the cities and towns and reenter the 
country. This is especially true in the Delta. 

The media reports that Braestrup derides were rarely as “pessimistic” 
as the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff* whose summary of the 
situation led the president to order “the initiation of a complete and 
searching reassessment of the entire U.S. strategy and commitment in 
South Vietnam*” the Pentagon Papers analyst reports. 1 ** 

The CIA must also be investigated for contributing to the decline of 
“free institutions” by its pessimism. A CIA paper of March I* presuma¬ 
bly uninfluenced by Walter Cronkite* expressed grave doubts about the 
GVN and ARVN and predicted that they might cease “effective func¬ 
tioning in pans of the country,” so that “virtually the entire burden of 
the war would fall on US forces. ” Like Cronkite a few days earlier* they 
expected “no better than a standoff’ in the coming ten months. Penta¬ 
gon systems analysis concluded that the offensive “appears to have 
killed the [pacification] program once and for all*” drawing the conclu¬ 
sion that Braestrup falsely attributes to the media (see appendix 3)* and 
estimated that “our control of the countryside and the defense of the 
urban areas is now at pre-August 1965 levels.” It was because of this 
serious situation—not perceived American successes* as Braestrup inti¬ 
mates—that they recommended what was later to be called “Vietnami- 
zation," 

The civilian analysts in the Pentagon must be charged not only with 
undue pessimism* but also with some of the other crimes of the press. 
For example* they referred to the famous statement that we are de¬ 
stroying South Vietnam in order to save it; citation of this statement 
is the target of much Braestrup scorn. We must also include Colonel 
Herbert Schandler* on whom Braestrup relies for his account of the 



22 6 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 
