
INTRODUCTION XXXI 


all known laws of war”)* 62 Between 1961 and 1971* however* the U*S* 
Air Force sprayed 20 million gallons of concentrated arsenic-based and 
dioxin-laden herbicides (mainly Agent Orange) on 6 million acres of 
crops and trees* besides using large quantities of the "super tear gas” 
CS and vast amounts of napalm and phosphorus bombs. 63 An estimated 
13 percent of South Vietnam's land was subjected to chemical attacks* 
This included 30 percent of its rubber plantations and 36 percent of 
its mangrove forests* along with other large forest areas* destroyed by 
toxic chemicals in programs that included multiple “large-scale inten¬ 
tional effort[s] combining defoliation with incendiaries to produce a 
forest fire in South Vietnam*” 64 A 1967 study prepared by the head of 
the Agronomy Section of the Japanese Science Council concluded that 
U*S* anti crop warfare had already ruined more than 3*8 million acres of 
arable land in South Vietnam* killing almost i*ooo peasants and over 
13*000 livestock* 65 This policy of attempting to force enemy capitula¬ 
tion by destroying its food supply was not only contrary to the rules of 
war* 66 it was notable in that it “first and overwhelmingly affected small 
children*” 67 

Laos was also subjected to chemical attacks in 1966 and 1969* directed 
at both crops, and vegetation along communication routes* And in Cam¬ 
bodia* some 173*000 acres of rubber plantations* crops and forests were 
heavily sprayed with Agent Orange in the spring of 1969. 63 The Cambo¬ 
dian government complained bitterly at the violation of its neutrality by 
this inhumane and illegal action* but Cambodia was too small and weak 
for its voice to be heard or for it to be able to mobilize a legal or other 
defense* Although the U,N* General Assembly did strongly condemn the 
use of chemical agents as contrary to international law by an 83^0-3 vote 
in 1969* it was powerless to act against the United States, and there was 
no “international community” mobilization to halt its use of chemical 
warfare in Cambodia or elsewhere in Indochina* 

During the Vietnam war* the use of chemicals was reported and criti¬ 
cized in the U,S. media when first disclosed in 1966* but the subject was 
quickly dropped. The illegality of chemical warfare and a policy of star¬ 
vation, and their effects on the victim population, were virtually unre¬ 
ported* There were exceptions, such as Orville Schell* Jr.'s 1971 Look 
magazine article “Silent Vietnam: How we invented ecocide and killed a 
country” but they were rare indeed. After the war, because of the effects 
of Agent Orange on U.S. soldiers, there was some coverage of this chem¬ 
ical warfare campaign* but the vastly greater impact on the direct targets 
of this warfare in South Vietnam remained close to invisible* Of 522 arti¬ 
cles in the New York Times 3 the Washington Post * the Los Angeles Times, 
Newsweek, and Time during the 1990s that mentioned Agent Orange and 



XXX11 INTRODUCTION 


Vietnam together* the vast majority focused on the harm done to U.S. 
service personnel; only nine articles acknowledged the targeting of food 
crops (thiry-nine mentioned forest cover alone as the target); only eleven 
discussed in any detail the impact on Vietnamese and the Vietnamese 
environment; only three characterized the use of Agent Orange as a 
“chemical weapon” or “chemical warfare;” and in only two articles was it 
suggested that its use might constitute a war crime. 

The Wall Street Journal did have a lead story on this topic in February 
1997* reporting that as many as 500*000 children may have been born 
with dioxin-related deformities and that birth defects in the South were 
four times those in the North. 70 The article did acknowledge U.S. re¬ 
sponsibility for this disaster but contended that “the United States* emo¬ 
tionally spent after losing the war* paid no heed.” But the United States 
did pay heed to the flight of the “boat people” and was not too exhausted 
to enforce a vigorous boycott of the target of its aggression* even if it took 
no responsibility whatever for the condition of its victims. 

The large-scale application of chemical weapons, and napalm* in Viet¬ 
nam was confined to the South, One reason for this was that North Viet¬ 
nam bad a government with links to other countries* so that the use of 
these barbarous and illegal weapons against it would have been widely 
publicized. South Vietnam was occupied by the United States and its 
client regime* so that the victimized people of the South were voiceless 
and could be treated with unlimited savagery. This of course contra¬ 
dicted the claim that we were protecting them against aggression, but the 
media not only underplayed the savagery* they failed to call attention to 
the contradiction and its significance. New York Times journalist Barbara 
Crossette did report that the U.S. failure to get involved in studying the 
effects of chemical warfare in Vietnam had been unfortunate* because as 
this country had used it heavily in the South but not in the North* this 
made Vietnam a controlled experiment in the effects of dioxin on humans 
from which much could be learned of benefit to ourselves. 71 But neither 
Crossette nor any other mainstream reporter had anything to say about 
the fact that the United States had used dioxin only on the ones it was 
allegedly protecting against aggression* nor did they suggest that this 
constituted a serious war crime* or that this country might have an obli¬ 
gation to help those it had victimized. 

During the 1980s, the Reagan administration mounted a major propa¬ 
ganda campaign over alleged victims of “Yellow Rain” in Cambodia 
and Laos* claiming that chemical warfare had been employed there by 
the Soviet Union through its Vietnam proxy. This propaganda effort 
eventually collapsed following the U.S. Army’s own inability to confirm 
this warfare and* more important* the finding that the alleged Yellow 

