assistance since that time, has been permanent state terror. With 
Guatemala, the United States invented the “counterinsurgency state. 55 

The special role of the army in the counterinsurgency state gradually 
elevated its status and power, and evenrually gave it the institutional 
capacity to rule Guatemala. As in many U.S. client states, the military 
used its power to carve out economic opportunities and to steal, directly 
or indirectly, 80 The terrorism, thievery, and autonomy of the Guatema¬ 
lan military reached a temporary peak—later surpassed by Rios 
Montt—during the reign of Lucas Garcia (1978-82), This overlapped 
the brief interlude of the Carter human-rights policy, during which 
there was open criticism of the Guatemalan government and a brief and 
partial cutoff of arms supply from the United States under congressio¬ 
nal pressure. 31 Even during the Carter years, however, relations with 
Guatemala were not hostile—it was as if a child in the family were 
naughty and briefly put in the comer. Part of the reason for the willing¬ 
ness of the Carter government to provide no new arms supplies was that 
the bad boy was in no danger. In El Salvador in 1980, by contrast, where 
the Carter administration saw the possibility of a left-wing victory, 
support was quickly forthcoming to a right-wing terror regime. 

During the Reagan years, the number of civilians murdered in 
Guatemala ran into the tens of thousands, and disappearances and 
mutilated bodies were a daily occurrence. 82 Studies by Amnesty Inter¬ 
national (AI), Americas Watch (AW), and other human-rights monitors 
have documented a military machine run amok, with the indiscriminate 
killing of peasants (including vast numbers of women and children), the 
forcible relocation of hundreds of thousands of farmers and villagers 
into virtual concentration camps, and the enlistment of many hundreds 
of thousands in compulsory civil patrols, 83 Reagan, however, visiting 
Guatemala in December 1982, commented that head of state Rios 
Montt was “totally committed to democracy” and was receiving a “bum 
rap” on hum an-rights abuses. Two months earlier, AI released its re¬ 
port describing sixty different Indian villages in which massacres of 
civilians took place in a three-month period, with the total killed ex¬ 
ceeding 2,5 oo, 84 

The Reagan policy toward Guatemala was, as with South Africa, 
“constructive engagement.” 85 From the beginning, the administration 
strove to embrace and provide arms to the military governments. Ongo¬ 
ing mass murder was merely an inconvenience. One method by which 
the administration sought to rehabilitate our relations with the 



74 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


Guatemala regimes was by continual lying about their human-rights 
record (with Reagan himself setting the standard), Stephen Bosworth, 
of the State Department, assured a House committee in July 1981 that 
the Lucas Garcia government was successfully attacking the guerrillas 
“while taking care to protect innocent bystanders,” 86 The State Depart¬ 
ment’s Country Report on Human Rights for 1981 also found it impossi¬ 
ble to determine who was doing all the killing in Guatemala, and 
disappearances were attributed to the “right” and the “left,” but not 
to the government. Amnesty International, by contrast, in February 
1981, gave detailed evidence that the thousands of murders were almost 
entirely governmental in origin, including those of the death squads, 
whose victims were targeted in an annex of Guatemala’s national palace 
under the direct supervision of President Lucas Garcia, 87 

With the overthrow of Lucas Garcia, suddenly, as if by magic, the 
Reagan administration line altered, and Stephen Bosworth “could not 
emphasize strongly enough the favorable contrast between the current 
human rights situation in Guatemala and the situation last December* 
. . Melvyn Levitsky, deputy assistant secretary of state for human 
rights, told another congressional committee that “the United States 
cannot easily sustain a relationship with a government which engages 
in violence against its own people,” as with the Lucas Garcia regime. 88 

When Lucas Garcia was in power, Bosworth found it a caring regime 
that protected the innocent, and the State Department couldn’t deter¬ 
mine that the government was doing any killing. With Lucas Garcia 
ousted, the State Department discovered that he was an indiscriminate 
murderer and assumed a high moral tone about his behavior. That is, 
the State Department implicitly conceded that it was lying earlier and 
counted on the press not to point this out. Of course, the reason for the 
switch was to help make a favorable case for Lucas Garcia’s successor, 
Rios Montt Under Rios Montt there was “a dramatic decline” in 
human-rights abuses, according to State Department spokesman John 
Hughes in January 1983. Rios Montt is the one whom Reagan found to 
be getting a bum rap. But as we noted. Amnesty International found 
Rios Montt to be another top-rank murderer, who appears to have 
exceeded his predecessor in civilian massacres. 

When Rios Montt was ousted in his turn, once again the State 
Department line shifted. It was admitted that things had been terrible 
under Rios Monrt in 1982, but now there was a dramatic improvement, 
and the government was showing “increased sensitivity to human rights 
questions.” 89 It is evident that we have here a consistent pattern that 
may be formulated into a quasi-law: in the case of a terrorist state with 
which the administration wants “constructive engagement,” things are 



WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS J$ 


always OK and improving; but when that regime is ousted, its record 
