the impotence of the individual. In a favorable political climate such as that 
provided by the Reagan administration, however, a giant corporation not liking 
media performance can buy its own, as exemplified by GE. 

35. Allan Sloan, “Understanding Murdoch—The Numbers Aren’t What Re¬ 
ally Matters,” Forbes, March 10,1986, pp. H4ff. 

36. On the Nixon-Agnew campaign to bully the media by publicity attacks and 
threats, see Marilyn Lashner, The Chilling Effect in TV News (New York: 
Praeger, 1984). Lashner concluded that the Nixon White House’s attempt 
to quiet the media “succeeded handily, at least as far as television is con¬ 
cerned ..(p. 167). See also Fred Powledge, The Engineering of Restraint: The 
Nixon Administration and the Press (Washington: Public Affairs Press, 1971), 
and William E. Porter, Assault on the Media: The Nixon Years (Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press, 1976). 

37. Of the 290 directors in his sample of large newspapers, 36 had high-level 
positions—past or present—in the federal government (Dreier, “The Position 
of the Press,” p. 303). 

38. One study showed that of sixty-five FCC commissioners and high-level 
staff personnel who left the FCC between 1945 and 1970, twelve had come out 
of the private-communications sector before their FCC sei :e, and thirty- 
four went into private-firm service after leaving the commission (Roger Noll 
et al., Economic Aspects of Television Regulation [Washington: Brookings, 1973], 
p. 123). 

39. “The symbiotic growth of American television and global enterprise has 
made them so interrelated that they cannot be thought of as separate. They 
are essentially the same phenomenon. Preceded far and wide by military 
advisers, lobbyists, equipment salesmen, advertising specialists, merchandising 
experts, and telefilm salesmen as advance agents, the enterprise penetrates 
much of the non-socialist world. Television is simply its most visible portion” 
(Erik Barnouw, The Sponsor [New York: Oxford University Press, 1978], p. 
158). For a broader picture, see Herbert I. Schiller, Communication and Cultu¬ 
ral Domination (White Plains, N.Y.: International Arts and Sciences Press, 
1976), especially chapters 3-4. 

40. Is it not possible that if the populace “demands” program content greatly 
disliked by the owners, competition and the quest for profits will cause them 


to offer such programming? There is some truth in this, and it, along with the 
limited autonomy of media personnel, may help explain the “surprises” that 
crop up occasionally in the mass media. One limit to the force of public 
demand, however, is that the millions of customers have no means of register¬ 
ing their demand for products that are not offered to them. A further problem 
is that the owners’ class interests are reinforced by a variety of other filters that 
we discuss below. 

