ity. If the articles are written in an assured and convincing style, are 
subject to no criticisms or alternative interpretations in the mass media, 
and command support by authority figures, the propaganda themes 
quickly become established as true even without real evidence. This 
tends to close out dissenting views even more comprehensively, as they 
would now conflict with an already established popular belief. This in 
turn opens up further opportunities for still more inflated claims, as 
these can be made without fear of serious repercussions. Similar wild 
assertions made in contradiction of official views would elicit powerful 
flak, so that such an inflation process would be controlled by the gov¬ 
ernment and the market. No such protections exist with system-sup¬ 
portive claims; there, flak will tend to press the media to greater hysteria 
in the face of enemy evil. The media not only suspend critical judgment 
and investigative zeal, they compete to find ways of putting the newly 
established truth in a supportive light. Themes and facts—even careful 
and well-documented analyses—that are incompatible with the now 
institutionalized theme are suppressed or ignored. If the theme col* 
lapses of its own burden of fabrications, the mass media will quietly fold 
their tents and move on to another topic. 128 

Using a propaganda model, we would not only anticipate definitions 
of worth based on utility, and dichotomous attention based on the same 
criterion, we would also expect the news stories about worthy and 
unworthy victims (or enemy and friendly states) to differ in quality . 
That is, we would expect official sources of the United States and its 
client regimes to be used heavily—and uncritically—in connection with 
one’s own abuses and those of friendly governments, while refugees and 
other dissident sources will be used in dealing with enemies, 129 We 
would anticipate the uncritical acceptance of certain premises in deal¬ 
ing with self and friends—such as that one’s own state and leaders seek 
peace and democracy, oppose terrorism, and tell the truth—premises 
which will not be applied in treating enemy states. We would expect 
different criteria of evaluation to be employed, so that what is villainy 
in enemy states will be presented as an incidental background fact in 
the case of oneself and friends. 130 What is on the agenda in treating one 
case will be off the agenda in discussing the other. 131 We would also 




A PROPAGANDA MODEL 35 


expect great investigatory zeal in the search for enemy villainy and the 
responsibility of high officials for abuses in enemy states, but dimin¬ 
ished enterprise in examining such matters in connection with one’s 
own and friendly states. 

The quality of coverage should also be displayed more directly and 
crudely in placement, headlining, word usage, and other modes of 
