ary international law—in its attack against Nicaragua. The sponsorship 
and support of state terror that cost some 200,000 lives in Central 
America in the preceding decade was not the subject of congressional 
inquiries or media concern. These actions were conducted in accord 
with an elite consensus, and they received steady media support, as we 
have seen in reviewing the fate of worthy and unworthy victims and the 
treatment of elections in client and errant states. 5 

In the case of the Vietnam War as well, as we showed in chapter 5, 






CONCLUSIONS pi 


even those who condemn the media for their alleged adversarial stance 
acknowledge that they were almost universally supportive of U*S* pol¬ 
icy until after large numbers of U*S. troops had been engaged in the 
“intervention” in South Vietnam* heavy casualties had been taken* 
huge dollar sums had been spent, and elite protest had surfaced on 
grounds of threats to elite interests. Only then did elements of the 
media undertake qualified reassessments of the “cost-benefit” trade-off. 
But during the period of growing involvement that eventually made 
extrication difficult, the watchdog actually encouraged the burglar to 
make himself at home in a distant land* and to bomb and destroy it with 
abandon. 

In short* the very examples offered in praise of the media for their 
independence* or criticism of their excessive zeal* illustrate exactly the 
opposite. Contrary to the usual image of an “adversary press'* boldly 
attacking a pitiful executive giant* the media's lack of interest, investi¬ 
gative zeal, and basic news reporting on the accumulating illegalities of 
the executive branch have regularly permitted and even encouraged 
ever larger violations of law* whose ultimate exposure when elite inter¬ 
ests were threatened is offered as a demonstration of media service “on 
behalf of the polity*” These observations reinforce the conclusions that 
we have documented throughout. 

The existing level of media subordination to state authority is often 
deemed unsatisfactory by critics. We have discussed several examples. 
Thus, Freedom House and others who are concerned to protect state 
authority from an intrusive public condemn the media for lack of 
sufficient enthusiasm in supporting official crusades* and even the lim¬ 
ited challenge to established authority during the Vietnam War and the 
Watergate period aroused concerns over the excessive power of the 
media* Quite commonly, the slight opening occasionally granted to 
dissent is considered far too dangerous to permit. This perception 
sometimes even takes the form of a paranoid vision of left-wing power 
that sweeps all in its path: for example, the plea of Claire Sterling and 
others who dominated media coverage of the Bulgarian Connection 
that they could barely be heard above the din of Soviet propaganda. A 
still more striking case is the Aikman-Shawcross fantasy, eagerly 
echoed by many others* about the “silencing” of the international 
media and governments by the left during the Pol Pot era. In reality* 
there was a huge chorus of protest over Khmer Rouge atrocities* which 
reached an extraordinary level of fabrication and deceit. The signifi¬ 
cance of these facts* and of the pretense of left-imposed “silence,” is 
highlighted by the contrast with the real silence over comparable atroci¬ 
ties in Timor at the same time* and the evasions and suppressions 



302 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


during the first phase of “the decade of the genocide,” to mention two 
cases where the United States was the responsible agent and protest 
could have been effective in diminishing or terminating large-scale 
atrocities. 

A propaganda model provides a ready explanation for this quite 
typical dichotomous treatment. Atrocities by the Khmer Rouge could 
be attributed to the Communist enemy and valuable propaganda points 
could be scored, although nothing useful could be done, or was even 
proposed, for the Cambodian victims. The image of Communist mon¬ 
sters would also be useful for subsequent U.S. participation in terror 
and violence, as in its crusades in Central America shortly after. In El 
Salvador, the United States backed the murderous junta in its struggle 
against what was depicted as “the Pol Pot left,” while Jeane Kirkpatrick 
mused darkly about the threat to El Salvador of “well-armed guerrillas 
whose fanaticism and violence remind some observers of Pol Pot”— 
shortly after the archbishop had denounced her junta friends for con¬ 
ducting a “war of extermination and genocide against a defenseless 
civilian population.” 6 Some are more circumspect—for example, Wil¬ 
liam Buckley, who observes that “the Sandinistas have given their 
people genocide” and are clearly heading in the direction of Pol Pot, 
although they have not quite reached that level yet. 7 The utility of the 
show of outrage over Pol Pot atrocities is evident from the way the fate 
of these worthy victims was immediately exploited to justify U.S. orga¬ 
nization of atrocities that, in fact, do merit comparison to Pol Pot. 

Atrocities in East Timor, however, have no such utilitarian function; 
quite the opposite. These atrocities were carried out by our Indonesian 
client, so that the United States could readily have acted to reduce or 
terminate them. But attention to the Indonesian invasion would have 
embarrassed a loyal ally and quickly disclosed the crucial role of the 
United States in providing military aid and diplomatic support for 
