though exceptions are allowed when private firms need subsidies, bail¬ 
outs, and government help in doing business abroad. When the Soviet 
economy stagnated in the 1980 s, it was attributed to the absence of mar¬ 
kets; when capitalist Russia disintegrated in the 1990 s, this was blamed 
not on the now ruling market but on politicians' and workers' failure to 
let markets work their magic . 20 Journalism has internalized this ideology. 
Adding it to the residual power of anticommunism in a world in which 
the global power of market institutions makes nonmarket options seem 
utopian gives us an ideological package of immense strength. 

These changes, which have strengthened the applicability of the prop¬ 
aganda model, have seriously weakened the “public sphere,” which refers 
to the array of places and forums in which matters important to a demo¬ 
cratic community are debated and information relevant to intelligent cit¬ 
izen participation is provided. The steady advance, and cultural power, of 
marketing and advertising has caused “the displacement of a political 
public sphere by a depoliticized consumer culture And it has had 
the effect of creating a world of virtual communities built by advertisers 
and based on demographics and taste differences of consumers. These 
consumption- and style-based clusters are at odds with physical commu¬ 
nities that share a social life and common concerns and which participate 
in a democratic order , 22 These virtual communities are organized to buy 
and sell goods, not to create or service a public sphere. 

Advertisers don't like the public sphere, where audiences are relatively 
small, upsetting controversy takes place, and the settings are not ideal 
for selling goods. Their preference for entertainment underlies the grad¬ 
ual erosion of the public sphere under systems of commercial media, 
well exemplified in the history of broadcasting in the United States over 
the past seventy-five years , 23 But entertainment has the merit not only 
of being better suited to helping sell goods; it is an effective vehicle for 
hidden ideological messages , 24 Furthermore, in a system of high and 
growing inequality, entertainment is the contemporary equivalent of 
the Roman “games of the circus” that diverts the public from politics 
and generates a political apathy that is helpful to preservation of the sta¬ 
tus quo. 

It would be a mistake to conclude from the fact that the public buys - 
and watches the offerings of the increasingly commercialized media 
that the gradual erosion of the public sphere reflects the preferences and 
free choices of the public either as citizens or consumers. The citizenry 


INTRODUCTION XIX 


was never given the opportunity to approve or disapprove the wholesale 
transfer of broadcasting rights to commercial interests back in 1934, 25 
and the pledge made by those interests, and subsequently by the Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC) itself, that public service offerings 
would never be buried in favor of the entertainment preferred by adver¬ 
tisers, was never fulfilled . 26 The public is not sovereign over the media— 
the owners and managers, seeking ads, decide what is to be offered, and 
the public must choose among these. People watch and read in good part 
on the basis of what is readily available and intensively promoted. Polls 
regularly show that the public would like more news, documentaries, and 
other information, and less sex, violence, and other entertainment, even 
as they do listen to and watch the latter. There is little reason to believe 
that they would not like to understand why they are working harder with 
stagnant or declining incomes, have inadequate medical care at high 
costs, and what is being done in their name all over the world. If they are 
not getting much information on these topics, the propaganda model can 
explain why: the sovereigns who control the media choose not to offer 
such material. 


UPDATING THE CASE STUDIES 

In the case studies presented in chapters 2 through 6 , we examine the dif¬ 
ferences in treatment of situations broadly similar in character, except for 
the political and economic interests at stake. Our expectation is that news 
as well as editorial opinion will be strongly influenced by those interests 
and should display a predictable bias. We would anticipate, for example, 
that an election held by a client-state government favored by U.S. offi¬ 
cials would be treated differently by the media than an election held by a 
government that U.S. officials oppose. It will be seen in chapter 3 that in 
the important elections analyzed there this dichotomous treatment and 
bias was displayed to an extraordinary degree. 


Worthy and Unworthy Victims 

In chapter 2 , we compare the media's treatment of victims of enemy 
states and those of the United States and U.S. client states. Our predic¬ 
tion is that the victims of enemy states will be found “worthy” and will 
be subject to more intense and indignant coverage than those victimized 



XX INTRODUCTION 


by the United States or its diems, who are implicitly “unworthy / 1 It is 
shown in chapter 2 that a 1984 victim of the Polish Communists, the 
priest Jerzy Popieluszko, not only received far more coverage than Arch¬ 
bishop Oscar Romero, murdered in the U.S. client-state El Salvador in 
1980 ; he was given more coverage than the aggregate of one hundred reli¬ 
gious victims killed in U.S. client states, although eight of those victims 
were US. citizens. 

