well within the bounds set by U.S. power- 23 

Only very rarely did U.S. reporters make any effort to see the war 
from the point of view of “the enemy"—the peasants of South Vietnam* 
Laos* or later Cambodia—or to accompany the military forces of “the 
enemy” resisting the U.S. assault. Such evidence as was available was 
ignored or dismissed. In reporting the war in Afghanistan, it is consid¬ 
ered essential and proper to observe it from the standpoint of the 
victims. In the case of Indochina* it was the American invaders who 
were regarded as the victims of the “aggression” of the Vietnamese* and 
the war was reported from their point of view, just as subsequent 
commentary* including cinema* views the war from this perspective. 

Refugee testimony* which could have provided much insight into the 
nature of the war* was also regularly ignored. The enemy of the U.S. 
government was the enemy of the press* which could not even refer to 
them by their own name: they were the “Viet Cong*" a derogatory term 
of U.S.-Saigon propaganda, not the National Liberation Front, a 
phrase “never used without quotation marks" by American reporters, 54 
who regularly referred to “Communist aggression” (E. W. Kenworthy) 
by the South Vietnamese in South Vietnam and Communist efforts “to 
subvert this country" (David Halberstam) 25 —their country* then under 
the rule of a U.S.-imposed client regime. 

To a substantial extent* the war was reported from Washington, In 
late 1970, when the process of elite defection was well under way* Los 
Angeles Times Washington correspondent Jules Witcover described the 
Washington scene during the earlier years: 



178 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


While the press corps m those years diligently reported what the 
government said about Vietnam, and questioned the inconsisten¬ 
cies as they arose, too few sought out opposing viewpoints and 
expertise until too late, when events and the prominence of the 
Vietnam dissent could no longer be ignored. In coverage of the 
war, the press corps 5 job narrowed down to three basic tasks— 
reporting what the government said, finding out whether it was 
true, and assessing whether the policy enunciated worked. The 
group did a highly professional job on the first task. But it fell 
down on the second and third, and there is strong evidence the 
reason is too many reporters sought the answers in all three cate¬ 
gories from the same basic source—the government. 26 

The search for “opposing viewpoints 55 as things went wrong was also 
extremely narrow, limited to the domain of tactics—that is, limited to 
the question of “whether the policy enunciated worked,” viewed en¬ 
