Time, Newsweek and CBS News played the same game of aggres- 


f 




44 manufacturing consent 


sively raising questions about “Hints of a Contract from the Top” 
(Time) and “Keeping the Lid on Murder” (Newsweek), and Time raised 
questions about possible Soviet involvement as well as the Bulgarian 
Connection. 

2 . 1 . 2 (d), Conclusions and follow-up. The New York Times had three 
editorials on the Popieluszko case. In each it focused on the responsi¬ 
bility of the higher authorities and the fact that “A police state is 
especially responsible for the actions of its police” (“Murderous Po¬ 
land/’ Oct. 30, 1984). It freely applied words like “thuggery/’ “shame¬ 
less/’ and “crude” to the Polish state. The fact that police officers were 
quickly identified, tried, and convicted it attributed to the agitation at 
home and abroad that put a limit on villainy. This is a good point, and 
one that we stress throughout this book: villainy may be constrained by 
intense publicity. But we also stress the corresponding importance of 
a refusal to publicize and the leeway this gives murderous clients under 
the protection of the United States and its media, where the impact of 
publicity would be far greater. 10 The Times also fails to note the con¬ 
trast between murderous Poland and murderous El Salvador—in the 
latter country, no murders of Salvadorans by the security forces or the 
death squads connected to them have ever resulted in a trial. The 
absence of such a comparison, as well as the failure of the Times to 
produce an editorial entitled “Murderous El Salvador/ 5 illustrates how 
a serviceable terrorism is protected in a propaganda mode. 11 


2.2, RUTILIO GRANDE AND THE 
UNWORTHY SEVENTY-TWO 

As shown on table 2-1, the unworthy seventy-two on Penny Lernoux’s 
list of martyrs were subject to a grand total of eight articles in the New 
York Times, one in Newsweek, and none in Time, and they were never 
mentioned on CBS News in the years of index coverage (1975-78). A 
total of seven names on the Lemoux list were mentioned in the eight 
Times articles, and two different ones were discussed in Newsweek, 
which means that sixty-three of the murders were blacked out entirely 
in these important media vehicles. None of the eight articles in the New 
York Times had any details or dramatic quality that might evoke sympa¬ 
thetic emotion. They described the murders as remote events in a 
