not required to vote* or to have ID cards stamped indicating that they 
had* And the Sandinistas did not kill ordinary citizens on a daily basis, 
as was true in the “death-squad democracies*” Thus turnout was far 
more meaningful in the Nicaraguan election than in the ones held in 
El Salvador and Guatemala—the public was free to abstain as well as 
to vote for opposition parties* 

The U*S* mass media disposed of this problem mainly by massive 
suppression* They simply ignored the contra-U*S, campaign for absten¬ 
tion, waged with threats and attacks on polling places and election 
workers; and they buried the fact of an effectively secret vote and the 
right not to vote, 93 just as, in parallel, they had inflated rebel disruption 
efforts in El Salvador in 1982 and 1984 and buried the voting requirement 
and other pressures to vote* 

Although the New York Times had gone out of its way to focus on 
the “challenge” of rebel opposition and alleged disruption as giving 
turnout special meaning in the Salvadoran election of 1982, 94 Stephen 
Kinzer never once mentioned that the contras attacked a number of 
polling stations and had issued radio appeals for abstention* 95 For 
Kinzer* neither these facts nor the U.S. campaign to discredit were seen 
as posing a “challenge” that made turnout meaningful in Nicaragua, 

The Irish delegation pointed out that “The Parties of the Demo¬ 
cratic Coordinating Committee [based in the business community] op¬ 
posed the voter registration, and called for a boycott of this process” 
(p, 5), and it noted that eleven polling stations were closed down by 
counterrevolutionary activities (p. 7)* The public voted in large num¬ 
bers “despite the possible dangers involved,” which suggested to the 
Irish delegation that turnout was significant and “showed how impor¬ 
tant the election was to the people” (p* 6), LASA pointed out the 
various ways in which the “main opposition” called for voter absten¬ 
tion, and cited the radio warnings broadcast into the country from 
Costa Rica threatening that voters would be killed by the contras (pp* 
16* 28). LASA also pointed out that “voter turnout was heavy,” with 
“more enthusiasm among voters in low-income areas than in more 
affluent neighborhoods,” 96 Like Time y LASA notes that the turnout did 
not quite realize the expectations of FSLN officials* but unlike Time 3 



LEGITIMIZING VERSUS MEANINGLESS THIRD WORLD ELECTIONS 123 


LASA points out that the rate of participation achieved “compares very 
favorably with the rates achieved in n other recent Latin American 
elections* as well as the 1984 U.S. presidential election . . (p. 16). 97 

In sum* the two observer reports discuss rebel disruption in Nicara¬ 
gua, turnout* and the meaning of that turnout. The U.S. mass media* 
which had featured these matters heavily in reference to the Salvadoran 
election—where they fitted the government’s propaganda agenda— 
found them entirely unnewsworthy as regards Nicaragua, 


3.6.4. The revived sensitivity to 
coercion 

As we described earlier* the “coercion package” was off the agenda for 
the U.S. government and mass media in addressing the Salvadoran and 
Guatemalan elections. So was the element of fear engendered by mass 
murder and the absence of any rule of law in these U.S. client states. 
Coercion and fear were back on the agenda* however* for Nicaragua, 
This revival was illustrated with amazing dishonesty and hypocrisy in 
Time^ which had never mentioned fear and pressures from the govern¬ 
ment as factors possibly explaining turnout in the U.S.-sponsored elec¬ 
tions, even after the murder of 50,000 civilians. In Nicaragua* however, 
the “pugnacious” Sandinistas had “an awesome monopoly of force,” 
and gening them to “relax their grip,” which was “essential for free 
electoral competition*” was extremely dubious. Time’s Central Ameri¬ 
can correspondent George Russell even located a “Latin American 
diplomat” who says, “You can’t have democracy where there is no 
personal liberty at all” (Oct. 8 and May 14* 1984). Russell and Time had 
never found the Salvadoran government “pugnacious*” with any “awe¬ 
some monopoly of force*” or as having a “grip” that needed relaxing 
for electoral competition, and personal liberty was never mentioned as 
lacking or even pertinent to Salvadoran elections. For the Nicaraguan 
election, however* Time found that “The pressure to participate was 
high: many citizens feared they would lose precious rationing cards.” 
Further, “the government had made it clear that it considered failure 
to vote a counterrevolutionary stance.” Later, quoting Daniel Ortega* 
“All Nicaraguans who are Nicaraguans are going to vote. The only ones 
who are not going to vote are sellouts” (Nov. 19* 1984). 

As we pointed out earlier* both the Guatemalan and Salvadoran 
army warned the public that voting was required by law and that 
nonvoting was treasonous. These statements were more precisely warn- 



124 manufacturing consent 


mgs* whereas Ortega's was an insult but not a clear threat. Ortega's was 
the only such statement of its kind reported, and Time's statement that 
the government “made it clear” that nonvoting was “counterrevolu¬ 
tionary” is doubly dishonest—the statement was not clearly a warnings 
and “counterrevolutionary” is an invidious word concocted by Time, 
The official government position as expressed in the law was that Nica¬ 
raguans did not have to vote. Time suppresses this fact. It suppresses 
