
The Sterling-Henze-Kalb (SHK) model, in which Agca was an agent 
of the Bulgarians (and, indirectly, of the Soviet Union), quickly became 



I46 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


the dominant frame of the mass media, through the great outreach of 
the Reader's Digest and the NBC-TV program (which was repeated in 
revised form in January 1983), and the ready* even eager, acceptance of 
this view by the other mainstream media. 7 The mass media in our 
sample— Newsweek, Time, the New York Times, and CBS News—all 
accepted and used the SHK model from the beginning, and retained 
that loyalty to the end of the Rome trial in March 1986. In the process 
they excluded alternative views and a great deal of inconvenient fact. 
With the Readers Digest, the Wall Street Journal, the Christian Science 
Monitor, and NBC-TV also firmly adhering to the SHK line* it quickly 
established a dominant position throughout the mainstream media. 

In the balance of this and the following two sections* we will describe 
the SHK model, discuss its weaknesses* and outline an alternative 
frame explaining Agca's confession implicating the Bulgarians, which 
the media ignored. We will then turn to a closer examination of the 
media's gullible reception of the SHK view and its fit to a propaganda 
model. 

The SHK model had the following essential elements: 

1 . Motive. In Sterling's Reader's Digest article, the preeminent motive 
in the assassination attempt was a Soviet desire to weaken NATO, to 
be accomplished by implicating a Turk in the assassination of the pope: 
“The Turk was there at St. Peter's to signal Christendom that Islamic 
Turkey was an alien and vaguely sinister country that did not belong 
in NATO." This motive was accompanied (and soon supplanted) by the 
contention that the shooting was to help quell the Solidarity movement 
in Poland by removing its most important supporter. At one point Paul 
Henze suggested that the intent of the KGB was perhaps merely to 
“wing" the pope, not kill him, as a warning, as in a James Bond movie. 
The costs and risks to the Soviet bloc of such a venture were never 
discussed by Sterling* Henze* or Kalb. 

2 . The proof of Soviet and Bulgarian involvement. Before Agca’s 
confession and his identification of Bulgarians in November 1982* the 
evidence on which SHK relied was confined to the fact that Agca had 
stayed in Bulgaria in the summer of 1980, and that Turkish drug traders 
with links to the Gray Wolves did business in Bulgaria. In November 
1982, Agca named three Bulgarians as his alleged accomplices and 
claimed to have been hired by the Bulgarians to do the job. He offered 
no credible evidence and named no witnesses to any dealings with 
Bulgarians, so that the new “evidence" was simply Agca's assertions, 
after seventeen months in an Italian prison. 


THE KGB -BULGARIAN PLOT TO KILL THE POPE I47 


3 , The ideological assumptions* As the case looked extremely thin* 
especially before Agca’s new confession of November 1982, the gaps 
were filled by ideological assumptions: This is the kind of thing the 
Soviets do. The Soviet Union and Bulgaria have been actively striving 
to “destabilize” Turkey* 8 If there is no hard evidence it is because the 
Soviets are consummate professionals who cover their tracks and main¬ 
tain “plausible deniability.” The KGB hired Agca in Turkey and caused 
him to use a rightist cover to obscure the fact that he was a KGB agent. 
Although Agca traveled through eleven other countries* his stay in 
Bulgaria was crucial because Bulgaria is a totalitarian state and the 
police know everything; therefore they knew who Agca was, and they 
must have been using him for their own purposes. 9 


4.2* PROBLEMS WITH THE 
STERLING-HENZE-KALB 
MODEL 

The basic Sterling-Henze-Kalb model suffered from a complete ab¬ 
sence of credible evidence* a reliance on ideological premises* and 
internal inconsistencies* As problems arose* the grounds were shifted* 
sometimes with a complete reversal of argument* 10 

An initial problem for the model was the Bulgarian-Soviet motive. 
In this connection* we should note the extreme foolishness of Sterling’s 
original suggestion that the Eastern bloc went to the trouble of locating 
a Turkish Fascist to shoot the pope in order to make Turkey look bad* 
and thereby to loosen its ties to NATO. That such a loosened tie would 
follow from a Turkish Fascist shooting the pope is not sensible* nor is 
it likely that the conservative Soviet leadership would indulge in such 
a fanciful plan even if it had a greater probability of “success.” 11 This 
theory assumed thar Agca would be caught and identified as a Turk, 
but that he wouldn’t reveal that he had been hired by the Bulgarians 
and the Soviets. Subsequently* Sterling suggested that Agca was sup¬ 
posed to have been shot in the square to assure his silence. The amaz¬ 
ingly incompetent KGB failed to accomplish this simple task. SHK also 
maintained at various points that Agca may not even have known who 
hired him* so he couldn’t implicate the East. Later* when Agca claimed 
that he had been heavily involved with Bulgarians in Rome, Sterling 
and Henze lapsed into silence on the failure of the KGB to maintain 
a semblance of plausible deniability. 

