unqualified transmission of the claim of a Cuban-based insurgency* 
which posed a serious dilemma for policy-making. 

The holocaust years 1978-85 yielded a steady stream of documents 
by human-rights groups that provided dramatic evidence of a state 
terrorism in Guatemala approaching genocidal levels. Many of these 
documents had a huge potential for educating and arousing the public* 
but as a propaganda model would anticipate, they were treated in our 
media sample in a manner that minimized their informational value and 
capacity to create and mobilize public indignation. Using a selection of 
ten important reports on Guatemala by Amnesty International and 
Americas Watch issued in the years 1981-87, we could only find mention 
of four of them in our media sample. 94 None of these four made it to 
the first page, and none provided the basis for an editorial or the 
building up of a press campaign of sustained coverage and indignation. 
The spectacular AI report of 1981 on “ DisappearancesA Workbook, 
describing a frightening development of state terrorism in the Nazi 
mold* was entirely ignored in our media sample, as was AFs March 1985 
report on “ Disappearances ". . . under the Government of General Oscar 
Humberto Mejia Victores, which if publicized would have interfered 
with the media’s portrayal of the Guatemalan elections of 1984-85 as 
exercises in legitimation (as described in the next chapter). AW’s 1985 
report on the Mutual Support Group was ignored, as was the 1987 study 
of human rights in Guatemala during Cerezo’s first year. We return to 
the Mutual Support Group in the next section. We will see in the next 
chapter, too, that the media reported Cerezo^s election in a framework 
of hopefulness and optimism, despite prior electoral experience in 
Guatemala and Cerezo’s own expressed doubts about his ability to rule; 
the ignoring of AW’s retrospective describing the actual results of 
Cerezo’s presidency reflects the media’s general failure to follow up on 
the effects of client state elections (as we show in chapter 3 with regard 
to El Salvador). 

We described earlier the important Americas Watch study 
Guatemala Revised: How the Reagan Administration Finds “Improve¬ 
ments” in Human Rights in Guatemala, whose most striking and impor¬ 
tant theme was the ex post facto admission by the State Department 
that its apologetics for the previous general had been false. This il¬ 
luminating document was ignored in our media sample, except for the 
New York Times, which gave it a three-inch article on page 7 under the 
benign title “Rights Group Faults U.S. on Guatemala Situation” (Sept. 
24,1985). The article describes the report as saying that the administra- 



78 manufacturing consent 


tion has refused to acknowledge major human-rights abuses in 
Guatemala, but it fails to mention the stress on the ex post facto tacit 
admission of lying. Mentioning this would, of course, suggest that the 
Times ’s primary source for its “news” is thoroughly untrustworthy. The 
last paragraph of the article, which absorbs a quarter of the three inches 
devoted to this document, gives a State Department response to the AW 
report, which is that AW is “less a human rights organization than it 
is a political one.” The brazen hypocrisy of this reton would have been 
clear and dramatic if the article had given the gist of AW’s evidence that 
the administration was not merely an apologist for state terrorism in 
Guatemala, but was also demonstrably dishonest. 

In its concern to protect the Guatemalan generals in their terroristic 
assault on the population, the Reagan administration took umbrage at 
organizations like Amnesty International and Americas Watch and 
mounted a systematic campaign in 1981 and 1982 to discredit them as 
left-wing and politically biased. In a letter dated September 15, 1982, 
directed to AI and the Washington Office on Latin America, Assistant 
Secretary of State Thomas Enders assailed the reporting of these or¬ 
ganizations as one-sided and apologetic for the “ferocious” and “ter¬ 
rorist attacks”—of the guerrillas. Enders writes that 

No one would deny the possibility [sic] of units of the military, 
in contravention of stated policy, having been involved in viola¬ 
tions of human rights. What is important is that since March 23 
the Government of Guatemala has committed itself to a new 
course and has made significant progress* 55 

This amazing piece of apologetics for an army that was in the midst of 
slaughtering thousands of civilians was distributed within Guatemala as 
an official U.S, document, and its full text appeared in the Guatemalan 
press. AW states: 

We find this use of the letter unconscionable in light of the risks 
run by human rights investigators in a political climate like 
Guatemala's. It also appears to us to be further evidence that the 
State Department, like the Guatemalan government, admits no 
neutrals in the Guatemalan conflict; the bringer of bad news 
becomes, through this reasoning, part of the enemy, to be publicly 
discredited if possible. 

Americas Watch also indicated that the State Department’s substantive 
criticisms of AW and AI were not merely incompetent but, more impor- 



WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS 79 


tant, were based largely on the assumed truthfulness of Guatemalan 
army claims (a form of gullibility displayed clearly in the statement by 
Enders quoted above). 
