
WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS 67 


and they generally transmitted Salvadoran and U.S. government claims 
about the state of the process without sarcasm or expressions of out¬ 
rage, If they had given full details, the Salvadoran government would 
have been thoroughly discredited. Thus, the extensive evidence con¬ 
cerning official Salvadoran refusals to take action or to interrogate 
relevant witnesses, and concerning threats to witnesses, lawyers, and 
judges—which would have been aired with delight if applicable to a 
Polish investigation—were ignored. 

A few illustrations of the Salvadoran proceedings will have to suffice 
here* Two years after the crime, for example, 

. * . the prosecutors expressed ignorance of the testimony [in the 
court record] of former guardsman Cesar Valle Espinoza, dated 
August 9, 1982, which quotes Subsergeant Colindres Aleman as 
stating on December 2,1980, that there were “superior orders” to 
apprehend the women. They were also ignorant of the statement 
of former National Guard Sergeant Dagoberto Martinez, taken by 
the FBI in Los Angeles, California, which establishes the exis¬ 
tence of a cover-up of the crime as early as December 1980. 64 

A second illustration of the process: two of three judges assigned to the 
case resigned for fear of their lives. As we noted, Judge Ramirez, who 
was investigating the Romero murder, fled for the same reason. This 
line of evidence has cumulative weight, but it was never treated as a 
whole by the press (and was barely mentioned as individual items of 
back-page news). A third illustration: according to former ambassador 
Robert White, two national guardsmen who might have been able to 
link higher-ranking officers to the murders of the women were killed 
by military death squads, then listed as missing in action. 65 A final 
illustration: when the Salvadoran triggermen were finally assigned at¬ 
torneys, one of the three, Salvador Antonio Ibarra, was prepared to 
defend the men seriously. His colleagues pressed Ibarra to abide by the 
statement that “the possibility of a cover-up had been thoroughly 
investigated” and rejected. He refused to go along with this request, 
with the consequence that on October 30,1983, Ibarra was seized by the 
National Guard and tortured at its headquarters. 66 Released only under 
U.S. pressure, Ibarra fled the country, leaving the way clear for a lawyer 
team that would accept the notion that there had been a “thorough 
investigation” of top-level involvement. This last incident alone made 
it into the mass media in isolated and fleeting treatment; the others, and 
the package, were not featured in the free press. 

The U.S. government also engaged in a systematic cover-up—of 





WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS 69 


blatantly prejudged the case. The only plausible rationale for the U.S, 
cover-up is that the administration wanted to minimize adverse public* 
ity concerning the performance of its murderous client. Information on 
what was really going on* or its own internal analyses of the case or 
appraisals of the Salvadoran legal process, would make the client look 
bad. The administration hoped that the case would “go away,” but until 
that happened, it wanted the publicity flow to be under its control. 

Part of the reason the administration wanted control was to allow it 
to claim reasonable progress in the pursuit of the case whenever the 
military government was due for more money. As with other right-wing 
satellites, “improvement” is always found at money-crunch time. In its 
July 1982 certification report, the State Department found that “sub¬ 
stantial progress” had been made in the case and predicted a trial in 
the fall of 1982. In early 1983, the certification report noted “significant 
developments” in the case. This manipulation of evidence to protect 
the flow of arms and money to the regime would not be easy with full 
disclosure—or with a critical and honest press. 

This cover-up of the Salvadoran judicial process* even though four 
murdered American women were involved, did not arouse the press to 
indignation or satire, nor did it cause them to provide more than mini¬ 
mal coverage of the inquiry. 


2.4.4. The trial — five national 
guardsmen for $19.4 million 

The trial of the five immediate killers of the four women should have 
been presented in a Kafkaesque framework, but the U,S, media played 
it very straight. The trial took place three-and-a-half years after the 
acts of murder, despite the fact that the iriggermen were immediately 
identified and despite enormous U,S. pressure. Two of three judges 
assigned to the case had resigned out of fear for their Jives, and the only 
independent defense attorney had fled the country after a session of 
torture at National Guard headquarters. The defense at the trial made 
no effort to defend the men on the grounds of “orders from above,” 
although this is a standard defense in such cases, and significant evi¬ 
dence was available for use in this instance. The mass media failed to 
note the point, although it suggests fear, a deal, or both, and although, 
as we saw in the Popieluszko case, the media are sometimes immensely 
alert to cover-ups. In March 1984, former intelligence officer Santi- 


