the police officers were described time and again, interspersed with the 
description of how Popieluszko pleaded for his life, and evidence of the 


worthy and unworthy victims 43 


brutality of the act* Numerous unflattering photos of the policemen on 
trial were presented, adding dramatic detail in support of the image of 
police viciousness. In the courtroom, the guilty police sit, one with "a 
nervous tic on the right side of his face [that] caused his dark mustache 
to twitch uncontrollably,” with “tear-filled testimony [that] gave the 
trial some of its most dramatic moments” (Time, Feb, r8, 1985), The 
police weep openly or bow their heads in the face of the grisly evidence. 
Popieluszko himself was humanized, with descriptions of his physical 
characteristics and personality that made him into something more than 
a distant victim. 7 In sum, the act of violence and its effects on Popie¬ 
luszko were presented in such a way as to generate the maximum 
emotional impact on readers. The act was vicious and deserved the 
presentation it received- The acts against the unworthy victims were 
also vicious, but they were treated very differently* 

2.1.2(b)* Stress on indignation, shock, and demands for justice. In 

a large proportion of the articles on the Popieluszko murder there are 
quotations or assertions of outrage, indignation, profound shock, and 
mourning, and demands that justice be done. Steady and wholly sympa¬ 
thetic attention is given to demonstrators, mourners, weeping people, 
work stoppages, masses held in honor of the victim, and expressions of 
outrage, mainly by nonofificial sources. The population “continues to 
mourn,” “public outrage mounted,” the pope is deeply shaken, and 
even Jaruzelski condemns the action. The net effect of this day^in-day- 
out repetition of outrage and indignation was to call very forcible 
attention to a terrible injustice, to put the Polish government on the 
defensive, and, probably, to contribute to remedial action, 

2*l*2(c). The search for responsibility at the top. In article after 
article, the U.S. media raised the question: how high up was the act 
known and approved? By our count, eighteen articles in the New York 
Times stressed the question of higher responsibility, often with aggres¬ 
sive headlines addressed to that point* 5 A number of articles bring in 
a Soviet link (“Lawyer Seemingly [sic] Implies a Soviet Link in Slaying 
of Priest” [Jan. 31, 1985]), and Michael Kaufman, of the Timesy twice 
manages to drag in the plot to kill the pope, which the U*S. press, led 
by the New York Times , had been trying to tie in with the Soviets and 
Bulgarians. 9 These links to the Soviet Union and the Bulgarian Con¬ 
nection are established by finding someone who says what the reporter 
and his paper want to dredge up—in no case was there a trace of 
supportive evidence* 

Time, Newsweek and CBS News played the same game of aggres- 


f 




44 manufacturing consent 


sively raising questions about “Hints of a Contract from the Top” 
(Time) and “Keeping the Lid on Murder” (Newsweek), and Time raised 
questions about possible Soviet involvement as well as the Bulgarian 
Connection. 

2 . 1 . 2 (d), Conclusions and follow-up. The New York Times had three 
editorials on the Popieluszko case. In each it focused on the responsi¬ 
bility of the higher authorities and the fact that “A police state is 
especially responsible for the actions of its police” (“Murderous Po¬ 
land/’ Oct. 30, 1984). It freely applied words like “thuggery/’ “shame¬ 
less/’ and “crude” to the Polish state. The fact that police officers were 
quickly identified, tried, and convicted it attributed to the agitation at 
home and abroad that put a limit on villainy. This is a good point, and 
one that we stress throughout this book: villainy may be constrained by 
intense publicity. But we also stress the corresponding importance of 
a refusal to publicize and the leeway this gives murderous clients under 
the protection of the United States and its media, where the impact of 
publicity would be far greater. 10 The Times also fails to note the con¬ 
trast between murderous Poland and murderous El Salvador—in the 
latter country, no murders of Salvadorans by the security forces or the 
death squads connected to them have ever resulted in a trial. The 
absence of such a comparison, as well as the failure of the Times to 
produce an editorial entitled “Murderous El Salvador/ 5 illustrates how 
a serviceable terrorism is protected in a propaganda mode. 11 


2.2, RUTILIO GRANDE AND THE 
UNWORTHY SEVENTY-TWO 

As shown on table 2-1, the unworthy seventy-two on Penny Lernoux’s 
list of martyrs were subject to a grand total of eight articles in the New 
York Times, one in Newsweek, and none in Time, and they were never 
mentioned on CBS News in the years of index coverage (1975-78). A 
total of seven names on the Lemoux list were mentioned in the eight 
Times articles, and two different ones were discussed in Newsweek, 
which means that sixty-three of the murders were blacked out entirely 
in these important media vehicles. None of the eight articles in the New 
York Times had any details or dramatic quality that might evoke sympa¬ 
thetic emotion. They described the murders as remote events in a 
