hard, to produce evidence that is credible, to construct serious argu¬ 
ments, to present extensive documentation—all tasks that are super¬ 
fluous as long as one remains within the presuppositional framework of 
the doctrinal consensus. It is small wonder that few are willing to 
undertake the effort, quite apart from the rewards that accrue to con¬ 
formity and the costs of honest dissidence. 

There are other considerations that tend to induce obedience. A 
journalist or commentator who does not want to have to work too hard 
can survive, even gain respectability, by publishing information (official 
or leaks) from standard sources; 12 these opportunities may well be 
denied to those who are not content to relay the constructions of state 
propaganda as fact. The technical structure of the media virtually 
compels adherence to conventional thoughts; nothing else can be ex¬ 
pressed between two commercials, or in seven hundred words, without 
the appearance of absurdity that is difficult to avoid when one is chal¬ 
lenging familiar doctrine with no opportunity to develop facts or argu¬ 
ment. In this respect, the U.S. media are rather different from those in 



306 manufacturing consent 


most other industrial democracies, and the consequences are noticeable 
in the narrowness of articulated opinion and analysis* The critic must 
also be prepared to face a defamation apparatus against which there is 
little recourse, an inhibiting factor that is not insubstantial. Many such 
factors exist, related to the essential structural features brought to light 
by a propaganda model but nevertheless worthy of derailed examina- 
tion in themselves. The result is a powerful system of induced conform¬ 
ity to the needs of privilege and power. 

In sum, the mass media of the United States are effective and power¬ 
ful ideological institutions that carry out a system-supportive propa¬ 
ganda function by reliance on market forces, internalized assumptions, 
and self-censorship, and without significant overt coercion. This propa¬ 
ganda system has become even more efficient in recent decades with the 
rise of the national television networks, greater mass-media concentra¬ 
tion, right-wing pressures on public radio and television, and the 
growth in scope and sophistication of public relations and news man¬ 
agement* 

This system is not all-powerful, however* Government and elite 
domination of the media have not succeeded in overcoming the Viet¬ 
nam syndrome and public hostility to direct U.S. involvement in the 
destabilization and overthrow of foreign governments, A massive Rea- 
gan-era disinformation and propaganda effort, reflecting in large mea¬ 
sure an elite consensus, did succeed in its major aims of mobilizing 
support for the U.S. terror states (the “fledgling democracies”), while 
