of press censorship to have been damaging to the election’s quality and 
credibility, even though the argument of the Sandinistas, that a country 
at war “can’t allow a newspaper which is the instrument of the enemy 
to publish its opinions freely” (Sergio Ramirez), is viewed as not wholly 
unreasonable. Nevertheless, while the censorship was also somewhat 
arbitrary and legalistic, LASA concluded that “The opposition could 
and did get its message out’’ (p. 26). And the finding overall was that 
the Nicaraguan election “by Latin American standards was a model of 
probity and fairness” (p. 32). 

The U.S. mass media did not concur, but it is striking how they avoid 
comparisons and data. The way in which the media can denounce 
restrictions on freedom of the press in Nicaragua after having totally 
ignored the question in El Salvador, where restrictions were far more 
severe, is remarkable. This process of dichotomization is so internalized 
that the writers use the double standard within the same article, appar¬ 
ently unaware of their own bias. In an article in the New York Times 
of March 12,1984, “Clear Choices in Salvador, Murky Plans in Nicara¬ 
gua,” Hedrick Smith regards the choices as “clear” in El Salvador, 
whereas in Nicaragua the problem is whether in an election the San¬ 
dinistas will “give up significant power and control.” Multiple parties 
from the far right to the center-right in El Salvador demonstrate clear 
choices, but a variety of parties from right to far left in Nicaragua didn’t 
cause Smith to perceive real choices there, although he didn’t explain 
why. It apparently never occurs to Smith that there is an issue of 
whether the army and United States “will give up power and control” 
(and their determination to fight to victory) by the electoral route in El 
Salvador. 

Are there essential freedoms and absence of coercion in El Salvador 
that are necessary for a truly free election? Hedrick Smith talks about 
substantive electoral conditions only in Nicaragua. He provides exten¬ 
sive detail on the trials of La Prensa, press censorship, the Sandinista 
monopoly of power, and limits allegedly imposed on opposition candi¬ 
dates in Nicaragua. Not a word, however, on death-squad and army 
murders of civilians in El Salvador or the Draconian laws of the state 
of siege. How many journalists have been killed in El Salvador? Papers 
closed? Radio stations blown up? Union leaders and political figures 
murdered? These questions are off the agenda in U.S.-staged elections, 
and Hedrick Smith ignores them. As a de facto spokesman for his 



132 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


government* the Times commentator uses doublethink with as much 
insouciance as Reagan and Shultz. 


