erratic leader,” whom Washington finds “lacking some of the talent and 



270 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


temperament for the job,” although “the Administration’s instinct has 
been to try to save a wayward young nation’s independence in spite of 
itself and, at times, despite its own leaders.” Washington is also alarmed 
by “Cambodia’s current effort to force the United States into a major 
conference that would embarrass its Thai and Vietnamese friends,” 
Frank el continues, an effort that will “be resisted”—referring to a 
conference that would settle border questions and guarantee Cam¬ 
bodia’s neutrality at a time when the United States was desperately 
seeking to undermine international efforts to neutralize South Vietnam, 
Laos, and Cambodia so as to avert the major war toward which the 
United States was driving because of its political weakness in Indo¬ 
china. 

This classic of colonialist paternalism reflects quite accurately the 
general mood of the day—as does the refusal to report such trivial 
matters as the regular U-S.-ARVN attacks on Cambodia, which have 
largely passed from history in the United States, apart from the dissi¬ 
dent literature. 


6.2.4. Phase I: The U.S. destruction 
of Cambodia 

On March 18,1969, the notorious “secret bombings” began. One week 
later, on March 26, the Cambodian government publicly condemned 
the bombing and strafing of “the Cambodian population living in the 
border regions ... almost daily by U.S. aircraft,” with increasing killing 
and destruction, alleging that these attacks were directed against 
“peaceful Cambodian farmers” and demanding that “these criminal 
attacks must immediately and definitively stop. ...” Prince Sihanouk 
called a press conference on March 28 in which he emphatically denied 
reports circulating in the United States that he “would not oppose U.S. 
bombings of communist targets within my frontiers.” “Unarmed and 
innocent people have been victims of U.S. bombs,” including “the 
latest bombing, the victims of which were Khmer peasants, women and 
children in particular.” He then issued an appeal to the international 
press: “I appeal to you to publicize abroad this very clear stand of 
Cambodia—that is, I will in any case oppose all bombings on Cambo¬ 
dian territory under whatever pretext.” 45 

It will come as no surprise that his appeal went unanswered. Further¬ 
more, this material has been suppressed up to the present time, apart 
from the dissident literature. 46 The standard position within the main- 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (II): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 2 JI 


stream* adopted by defenders of the bombing and critics as well* is that 
“Sihanouk did not protest” (William Shawcross), When the “secret 
bombings” became public knowledge in 1973* it was claimed that Siha¬ 
nouk had privately authorized bombing of Vietnamese bases near the 
border areas* True or false* that is irrelevant to the suppression of 
Sihanouk’s impassioned appeals* which referred to the bombing of 
Khmer peasants. Furthermore* as we observed in earlier discussion* 
st while commentators and media analysts may draw whatever conclu¬ 
sions they please from the conflicting evidence available, this does not 
entitle them to suppress what is* by any standards, crucial evidence* in 
this case* Sihanouk’s attempt to arouse international protest over the 
U*S* bombing of the civilian society.” 47 

Reviewing this period in his Cambodia Year Zero, Francois Pon- 
chaud remarks that Sihanouk called the U*S. bombings of “Vietcong 
bases” a “scandal and a crime over Radio Phnom Penh, but nobody was 
deceived*” Ponchaud and his readers* however* are deceived: Sihanouk 
publicly denounced the bombing and other attacks on Khmer peasants, 
and not only over Radio Phnom Penh but in quite public documents 
and appeals to the international press , In his Sideshow, Shawcross says 
only that Cambodia “continued to denounce” American air and artil¬ 
lery attacks through 1969, but “made no public protest that specifically 
mentioned B-52 attacks” (p* 94)—true* but irrelevant for the reasons 
repeated in the last paragraph. 48 

In May 1969, William Beecher reported B-52 raids on “Vietcong and 
North Vietnamese supply dumps and base camps in Cambodia*” citing 
U.S. sources, Beecher stated that “Cambodia has not made any pro¬ 
test*” disregarding Sihanouk’s appeals and his protest against the mur¬ 
der of “Khmer peasants* women and children in particular*” not 
Vietnamese military bases, Beecher also commented that “in the past, 
American and South Vietnamese forces had occasionally fired across 
the border and even called in fighters or helicopter gunships to counter 
fire they received from enemy units there,” ignoring the somewhat 
more important fact that U*S* aircraft and U*S -ARVN-South Korean 
forces had been attacking Cambodian villages, according to the 
“friendly” government of Cambodia, The headline for his article states 
falsely: “Raids in Cambodia by U,S, Unprotested,” Beecher’s article 
caused consternation in Washington* setting off the first stage of what 
later became the Watergate scandal. As we have commented elsewhere* 
“It is remarkable that Beecher’s unique though quite inadequate ac¬ 
count is now held up as evidence that the press maintained its honor 
throughout this period, despite the crimes of Richard Nixon.” 49 

