survival of free institutions and democracy. 

The first component of the thesis is commonly accepted even by 
those who deny the second. Thus* rejecting “the stab-in-the-back the¬ 
sis*” George Herring nevertheless observes: “That the media was hos¬ 
tile to the war and to Johnson seems clear, and much of the reporting 
of Tet was misleading”* these “distortions of the media” may have 
contributed to “growing popular discontent 55 with the war and “public 
anxiety,” Herring adds* but these were not the operative factors in 
Johnson's decision to de-escalate and seek negotiations after Tet. 107 

An analysis of the facts and the argument demonstrates that neither 
component of the Freedom House thesis is tenable. The second* as we 
shall see, is conceded in the Freedom House study to be false with 
regard to public opinion, and the straw at which they then grasp will 
plainly not bear the weight. As for the first component* on the narrow 
question of professional competence in reporting the facts available 
under trying and confused circumstances, the performance of the 
media was acceptable if not outstanding, and compares quite favorably 
to the internal reporting of the American military authorities and U.S. 
intelligence* insofar as these are available. But when we turn to broader 
questions of the sort discussed earlier—that is* if we evaluate the media 
by the standards that we would properly apply to reporting, say, on the 
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan—we see that indeed they can be faulted 
in precisely the terms anticipated by the propaganda model. The very 
example selected as providing the strongest grounds for their accusa¬ 
tions by Freedom House and other critics from the jingoist right wing 
of the political spectrum actually happens to demonstrate the precise 
opposite of what is alleged—namely, it provides yet another striking 
illustration of the subservience of the media to the state propaganda 
system. 108 

The Freedom House study itself provides ample documentation to 
establish these conclusions* and to refute its own specific allegations 
point by point. Given the major role that this study and the thesis it 
allegedly established has played in recent ideology, we will give some 
attention to the chasm that lies between its interpretation and summar¬ 
ies* on the one hand, and the documentary record that it (in part) 
presents, on the other. 109 The comments and summaries often seriously 
misrepresent the contents of the documents described or are outright 
falsifications. The analysis, laced with bitter sarcasm throughout, is 



214 BAAMUFACTUfcIHG CONSENT 


thoroughly undermined when compared with the actual documents* 
When the countless errors and careless and inaccurate comments are 
corrected, nothing remains of the Freedom House case. The sardonic 
