366 NOTES TO PAGES 155-159 

24. The first significant departure in the mass media from the SHK model, 
even though no alternative was offered, did not occur till May 12, 1983, on 
ABC-TV’s “20/20.” On the pattern of deviations here and later, see note 26 
below. 

25. Late in this long article, Newsweek does state in passing that “It is difficult 
to believe that the Soviets would expect the murder of the pope to solve their 
Polish problem. To some, it seems odd that the Soviets would put their fate 
in the hands of Bulgarians and Turks, depriving themselves of the control that 
is so essential to a ticklish intelligence operation.” These sentences, unusual 
in the mass media for raising such questions, sit alone and undeveloped, after 
a lengthy discourse that accepts the SHK analysis as valid. 

26. The only programs on national television that challenged the propaganda 
frame were on ABC: one, and the only program in five years of television 
coverage that showed the slightest degree of network enterprise, critical capa¬ 
bility, and honesty, was a program “To Kill the Pope,” aired on “20/20” on 
May 12,1983. Subsequently, ABC also had a program in which Sterling debated 
with Alexander Cockburn, although this was arranged unbeknownst to Ster¬ 
ling, who was enraged at having to have her views contested. (See Herman and 
Brodhead, Bulgarian Connection, pp. 123-24, for the story of this encounter.) 
Among the newspapers, a propaganda conformity prevailed until the time that 
prosecutor Albano’s report was made public in June 1984, when Michael 
Dobbs, of the Washington Post, began to take a more critical view, along with 
Don Schanche, of the Los Angeles Times . While skeptical of Agca’s claims over 
the next several years, Dobbs remained equally skeptical of the idea that Agca 
was coached, which he referred to as “the Bulgarian view.” Dobbs never 
seriously explored the coaching hypothesis. See Herman and Brodhead, Bul¬ 
garian Connection, “The Small Voices of Dissent,” pp. 199-202. 

27. Martella visited Washington, D.C., in October 1982, during which time he 
benefited not only from the insights of Arnauld de Borchgrave, but was also 
given a special viewing of the NBC-TV special on “The Man Who Shot the 
Pope” (see Herman and Brodhead, Bulgarian Connection, pp. 24-27). Ledeen 
may have had a more direct involvement in the initiation of the case in Italy, 
a charge made by Francesco Pazienza. See Diana Johnstone, “Bulgarian Con¬ 
nection: Finger-pointing in the Pontiff Plot Labyrinth,” In These Times, Janu¬ 
ary 29-February 4, 1986. 

28. For a statistical tabulation of the extent of this bias, see table 7-1, “Sterling- 
Henze-Ledeen Dominance of Media Coverage of the Bulgarian Connection, 
September 1982-May 1985,” in Herman and Brodhead, Bulgarian Connection, 
pp. 182-83. 

29. Their coercive tactics were effective because their preestablished promi¬ 
nence and drawing power made them important to program organizers, which 
gave them leverage. This is the basis for “tying agreements,” outlawed under 
section 3 of the Clayton Act. 

30. This Sterling theme and the ends sought by these conferees also reflected 
an elite consensus in the United States; otherwise the mass media would not 
have accepted her views so readily. 

31. See Herman and Brodhead, Bulgarian Connection, chapter 6, “The Disin- 
formationists.” 

32. In a characteristic lie, Sterling says in her Terror Network ([New York: 


NOTES TO PAGES 159-161 367 


Holt, Rinehart & Winston/Reader’s Digest Press, 1984], p. 290) that Sejna got 
out of Czechoslovakia “a jump ahead of the invading Soviet army,” when in 
fact Sejna defected in the middle of the Czech Spring, long before the Soviet 
invasion, and in the midst of a corruption scandal in which Sejna was a 
principal. See Leslie Gelb, “Soviet-Terror Ties Called Outdated,” New York 
Times, October 18, 1981. In his book Veil, Bob Woodward notes that CIA 
analysts had at once dismissed Sterling’s concoctions as “preposterous,” giving 
some examples, including her reliance on Italian press stories that had been 
planted in CIA disinformation operations ([New York: Simon & Schuster, 
i 987], pp. 124-29). For detailed refutation, see Edward S. Herman, The Real 
Terror Network (Boston: South End Press, 1982). 

33. Sejna, of course, failed this test by “recognizing” the forged document, 
which had slipped his mind, and used it in later years for its spectacular 
disclosures. See Lars-Erik Nelson, “The Deep Terror Plot: A Thickening of 
Silence,” New York Daily News, June 24,1984; Alexander Cockburn, “Beat the 
Devil,” The Nation, August 17-24,1985. Sterling was introduced to this Sejna 
information windfall by Michael Ledeen. (see Sterling, Terror Network p. 34). 

34. See also “Why Is the West Covering Up for Agca? An Exclusive Interview 
with Claire Sterling,” Human Events, April 21, 1984. 

35. This quotation and line of thought was presented by Sterling in her speech 
given at the Conference on Disinformation, in Paris, December 5,1984, spon¬ 
sored by Internationale de la Resistance, a coalition of right-wing resistance/ 
“liberation” organizations and support groups. We quote from page 2 of the 
copy of her speech distributed by the sponsor organization. The booklet by 
Andronov to which she attributes such great influence was, to our knowledge, 
never mentioned in the U.S. mass media except by Sterling and Henze. 

36. Even Michael Dobbs failed to deal with the fact that the Bulgarian defense 
claimed that no publicly available sources—i.e., newspapers, or radio and 
television programs—had ever had details on Antonov’s apartment before Agca 
provided those details to the investigating magistrate. This would seem to 
imply that Agca got the details by some form of coaching while in prison. 
Dobbs dismisses coaching as the “Bulgarian view,” but never explains what 
