critique of the media for “losing the war” by their incompetent report¬ 
ing and their anti-government bias reflecting their passion for confront¬ 
ing authority. The authoritative “proof” of this contention was 
provided in the two-volume Freedom House study by Peter Braestrup* 
Conducted over a six-year period with a wide range of distinguished 
participants and consultants* and support acknowledged from some two 
dozen corporations and labor unions, this study was hailed as a “monu¬ 
mental” work by Don Oberdorfer in a Washington Post magazine cover 
story on the tenth anniversary of the offensive, with the title: “Tet: The 
Turning Point: How a *Big Event 5 on Television Can Change Our 
Minds, 15 Professor John P* Roche, of the Fletcher School of Law and 
Diplomacy of Tufts University, “intellectual-in-residence” for the 
Johnson administration, described the Freedom House study as “one 
of the major pieces of investigative reporting and first-rate scholarship 
of the past quarter century, 51 a “meticulous case-study of media incom¬ 
petence, if not malevolence*” In a relatively critical discussion in the 
Times 's Sunday book review, Edwin Diamond praises this “painstak¬ 
ingly thorough study of how the Vietnam war was presented to the 
American public by its leading image makers,” a “highfalutin 5 epis¬ 
temological quest” by a “conscientious ... reporter-analyst” that raises 
profound questions about “how do we know what we know, 55 revealing 
“the biases introduced by standard journalistic assumptions and organi¬ 
zational practices 51 that contributed to undermining the U.S. position 
in Vietnam among the general public and Congress. Similarly, Charles 
Mohr reports that in a conference of “aging hawks and doves” on the 
tenth anniversary of the Tet offensive at the University of North Caro¬ 
lina, “Journalism came in for some strong criticism and only a rather 
muted defense* 55 The criticism was by Braestrup, who “expounded 
gently the theme of his recent book,” Big Story, and the hawks in 
attendance, “while some of the reporters there demurred only softly. 
The study is regularly cited by historians, without qualification, as the 
standard work on media reporting of the Tet offensive, “in some re¬ 
spects as important as the battle itself, 55 here “analysed in depth” 
(R. B. Smith). 106 

Oberdorfer too accepts the conclusions of the study as proven: it was 
the “ *Big Event 5 on television 55 that changed our minds about the war* 
The only commentary he cites, even obliquely, accepts this judgment 
(Roche and others unnamed). Within the mainstream more generally, 
it is assumed with little question that this remarkable scholarly contri- 



212 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


bution made its case, though one may debate whether it revealed “ma¬ 
levolence” or deeper problems of “standard journalistic assumptions 
and organizational practices,” reflecting perhaps the “adversarial 
stance” of the media with regard to established power. 
