attention and context it deserved, whether it was intelligible to the 
reader or effectively distorted or suppressed. What level of attention it 
deserved may be debatable, but there is no merit to the pretense that 
because. certain. facta may he. found. in. the. media. h.y a. diligpnr. and. 
skeptical researcher, the absence of radical bias and de facto suppres¬ 
sion is thereby demonstrated. 14 

One of our central themes in this book is that the observable pattern 
of indignant campaigns and suppressions, of shading and emphasis, and 
of selection of context, premises, and general agenda, is highly func¬ 
tional for established power and responsive to the needs of the govern¬ 
ment and major power groups. A constant focus on victims of 
communism helps convince the public of enemy evil and sets the stage 
for intervention, subversion, support for terrorist states, an endless 
arms race, and military conflict—all in a noble cause. At the same time, 
the devotion of our leaders and media to this narrow set of victims 
raises public self-esteem and patriotism, as it demonstrates the essential 
humanity of country and people. 

The public does not notice the silence on victims in client states, 
which is as important in supporting state policy as the concentrated 
focus on enemy victims. It would have been very difficult for the 
Guatemalan government to murder tens of thousands over the past 
decade if the U.S. press had provided the kind of coverage they gave 
to the difficulties of Andrei Sakharov or the murder of Jerzy Popie- 
luszko in Poland (see chapter 2). It would have been impossible to 
wage a brutal war against South Vietnam and the rest of Indochina, 
leaving a legacy of misery and destruction that may never be over¬ 
come, if the media had not rallied to the cause, portraying murderous 
aggression as a defense of freedom, and only opening the doors to 
I'dciicaj’ufsagreemeni wrfen the costs to me interests they represent 
became too high. 

The same is true in other cases that we discuss, and too many that 
we do not. 

We would like to express our thanks to the following people for their 
assistance in the preparation of this book: James Aronson, Phillip Ber¬ 
ryman, Larry Birns, Frank Brodhead, Holly Burkhalter, Donna Cooper, 




lxiv PREFACE 


Carol Fouke, Eva Gold, Carol Goslant, Roy Head, Mary Herman* Rob 
Kirsch, Robert Krinsky* Alfred McCtung Lee, Kent MacDougall* 
Nejat Ozyegin* Nancy Peters, Ellen Ray, William Schaap* Karin Wil¬ 
kins, Warren Wine, and Jamie Young. The authors alone remain re¬ 
sponsible for its contents. 





MANUFACTURING 

CONSENT 



A Propaganda Model 


nri 

Ihe MASS MEDIA SERVE AS A SYSTEM FOR COMMUNICATING 
messages and symbols to the general populace. It is their function to 
amuse, entertain, and inform, and to inculcate individuals with the 
values, beliefs, and codes of behavior that will integrate them into the 
institutional structures of the larger society. In a world of concentrated 
wealth and major conflicts of class interest, to fulfil this role requires 
systematic propaganda. 1 

In countries where the levers of power are in the hands of a state 
uDreaucfacy;' nib ■'liTonoponVcw; "vOfirror^vcr^At ur&n-\>appnl* 

mented by official censorship, makes it clear that the media serve the 
ends of a dominant elite. It is much more difficult to see a propaganda 
system at work where the media are private and formal censorship is 
absent. This is especially true where the media actively compete, peri¬ 
odically attack and expose corporate and governmental malfeasance, 
and aggressively portray themselves as spokesmen for free speech and 
the general community interest. What is not evident (and remains 






2 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


undiscussed in the media) is the limited nature of such critiques, as well 
as the huge inequality in command of resources, and its effect both on 
access to a private media system and on its behavior and performance* 

A propaganda model focuses on this inequality of wealth and power 
and its multilevel effects on mass-media interests and choices* It traces 
