

strongly, perhaps more strongly than the public itself. It didn't 
work out that way, and eventually television brought the bad 
news. But it never explained why: it never reexamined the as¬ 
sumptions about the nature of the war it had helped to propagate 
in the early years* So to the public, the bad news must have 
seemed nearly as incomprehensible as an earlier "American de¬ 
feat” in Asia: the “loss” of China. 

Attribution of the American failure by the public to “treason” or “lack 
of American will” caused by the failure of the media to support our just 
cause with sufficient fervor is, therefore, “hardly surprising.” 93 

This may well explain why the public has apparently been willing to 
accept the tales about media treachery. But among the educated elites, 
the explanation may lie elsewhere: in a totalitarian cast of mind that 
regards even the actual level of media subservience to the state as 
inadequate and a threat to order and privilege by the “forces of anarchy 
. . * on the march*” 


5,5. SOME CRUCIAL EVENTS OF 
THE WAR 


5.5.1. The Tonkin Gulf incident 

By mid-1964, there was a growing consensus among Vietnamese in 
favor of a negotiated political settlement, while the United States was 
maneuvering with increasing desperation to evade what internal docu¬ 
ments describe as "premature negotiations,” The reason, as frankly 
explained, was that the United States was politically isolated, in opposi¬ 
tion to the NLF, the non-Communist opposition, and even the gener¬ 
als. It was therefore regarded as necessary to expand the war to the 
North to “obtain [the DRV's] cooperation in bringing an end to the 
Viet Cong insurgency” and to “persuade or force the DRV to stop its 
aid to the Viet Cong and use its directive powers to make the Viet Cong 
desist” (Ambassador Maxwell Taylor). Intelligence, meanwhile, con¬ 
cluded that “the basic elements of Communist strength in South Viet¬ 
nam remain indigenous*” 94 

U.S*~run military operations against North Vietnam began on Feb- 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (i): VIETNAM 207 


ruary i, 1964 (OPLAN-34A), using South Vietnamese and “third-coun¬ 
try” mercenaries, “presumably mostly Nationalist Chinese,” according 
to Kahin. These operations were officially “designed to result in sub¬ 
stantial destruction, economic loss, and harassment,” 95 On July 30-31, 
Saigon Navy vessels attacked North Vietnamese islands, eliciting an 
official DRV protest to the International Control Commission on July 
31. The U.S. destroyer MaddoXy conducting an electronic espionage 
operation in that general area, entered the twelve-mile zone regarded 
by North Vietnam as its territorial waters on August 2. The Maddox 
was challenged by North Vietnamese patrol boats, fired “warning 
shots,” and was hit by a single bullet in the ensuing battle, in which the 
patrol boats were damaged or destroyed by the destroyer and U.S. 
aircraft. On August 3, Secretary of State Dean Rusk sent a (secret) cable 
to Ambassador Taylor, stating that “We believe that present Op Plan 
34 A activities are beginning to rattle Hanoi, and Maddox incident is 
directly related to their efforts to resist these activities.” The Maddox 
was returned to the area along with the destroyer Turner Joy on August 
3, and on August 3 and 4 Saigon naval vessels bombarded North Viet¬ 
namese coastal facilities, “quite possibly one that the destroyer's elec¬ 
tronic surveillance had activated and located,” Kahin observes. There 
was some indication that the U.S. destroyers might have come under 
attack by North Vietnamese patrol boats on August 4, although Captain 
John Herrick of the Maddox was unsure, and radioed that reports 
“appear very doubtful” and that there were “No actual sightings by 
Maddox,” recommending “complete evaluation before any further ac¬ 
tion.” Subsequent evidence indicates that almost certainly no attack 
took place. 96 

On August 5, President Johnson publicly denounced the “open ag¬ 
gression on the high seas against the United States of America” by the 
North Vietnamese, while the DRV and China stated that “the so-called 
second Tonkin Gulf incident of 4 August never occurred” (Chinese 
government statement). On August 5, U.S. planes bombed North Viet¬ 
namese installations and destroyed North Vietnamese patrol boats. 
After testimony by Defense Secretary Robert McNamara in which he 
falsely claimed that the Maddox “was operating in international waters, 
was carrying out a routine patrol of the type we carry out all over the 
world at all times,” Congress passed a resolution authorizing the presi¬ 
dent to “take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against 
the forces of the United States and to prevent further aggression” (416 
to o in the House, Wayne Morse and Ernest Gruening alone in opposi¬ 
tion in the Senate). This August 7 resolution was subsequently ex- 



20 S MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


ploited as the basis for the escalation of the U.S* attack against Viet- 
nam 97 

