disappeared daughter, saw some one hundred bodies in the months he 
spent at the morgue, and “seventy to seventy-five percent of them had 
been tortured. 15102 Others took different painful routes in their search* 
In early 1985, one woman was told by an army officer that her husband 
was still alive* and that he would see to his return if she slept with him* 
She did so, and her husband turned up dead shortly thereafter* 103 

The intention of the organizers of GAM was to seek strength by 
collective action, and to use it to gather data and seek redress by 
petition and publicity* Their hope for survival and success rested, in 
part, on the fact that the chief of state, Mejia Victores, was being built 
up by the Reagan administration as another “reformer, 11 and the Rea¬ 
gan—Mejia Victores ream was trying to establish the appropriate 
“image 55 to induce Congress to loosen the purse strings* GAM also had 
support within Guatemala from Archbishop Penados del Barrio and 
other church groups and lay persons, although few felt able to speak 
up in the system of unconstrained state terror* Internationally, GAM 
received significant political support from progressive and humanitar¬ 
ian political parties and human-rights groups. 

Thirty members of the newly organized GAM held a press confer¬ 
ence in Guatemala City in June 1984, denouncing the disappearances 
and calling on the government “to intervene immediately in order to 
find our loved ones.” In the latter part of June, and again in early 
August, masses were held in the Metropolitan Cathedral to express 
concern over the fate of the disappeared, with the initial services held 
by the university rector, Meyer Maldonado, and Archbishop Penados* 
A thousand people attended the August mass* On August 1, the group 
first mer with General Mejia Victores, at which time he promised to 
investigate the disappearances* In ads placed in the major newspapers 
on August 8 and 9, GAM put his promises on the public record- Subse¬ 
quently the group began to call attention to the government's failure 
to follow through on the August 1 promises, and they moved gradually 
to other actions. In October 1984 they sponsored a march and mass for 
the disappeared at the cathedral—the first mass demonstration in 
Guatemala since May 1,1980 (at which time protestors were seized on 
the streets and an estimated one hundred were assassinated, or disap¬ 
peared). 



82 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


The organization continued to grow, from the initial handful to 225 
families in November 1984 and then to 1*300 in the spring of 1986. Most 
of the members were women* a large majority peasant women from the 
countryside. They were persistent. After initial petitions, requests, 
meetings, and marches, they began to make explicit accusations and 
“publicly charge elements of the national security forces as directly 
responsible for the capture and subsequent disappearance of our family 
members,” 104 They asked for an investigation, an accounting, and jus¬ 
tice, They appealed to the constituent assembly and began regular 
protests in downtown Guatemala City, banging pots and pans and, on 
occasion, peacefully occupying buildings. 

Nothing, of course, was done in response to the GAM demands. The 
assembly had no powers anyway, but was too fearful even to pass a 
resolution of support. The military rulers toyed with GAM, In public, 
with the press on hand, Mejia Victores would say, “I don't want to shirk 
responsibilities and something has to be done.” But when the press was 
not there, he said, “It seems as though you are accusing me—and we 
don't have them [the disappeared].” “You have them,” we said. “We 
don't have them,” he replied. 105 The military rulers were getting an¬ 
noyed, and phone threats, letters of warning, and open surveillance 
intensified. Two days after the exchange between Mejia Victores and 
GAM, the tortured bodies of two disappeared associated with GAM 
members showed up, one placed in front of his house with his eyes 
gouged out and his face barely recognizable. 

In a television interview on March 14,1985, Mejia Victores said that 
GAM was “being used by subversion, because if they have problems, 
solutions are being found, and they have been given every advantage 
to [solve these problems],” 106 A spate of newspaper headlines followed, 
stressing government warnings and allegations that GAM was being 
manipulated by subversives. In mid-March, General Mejia Victores 
was asked on television what action the government would take against 
GAM, He replied, “You'll know it when you see it*” 107 

On March 30, 1985, GAM leader Hector Gomez Calito was seized, 
tortured, and murdered, (The six policemen who had come for him 
were themselves assassinated shortly after his death.) 108 He had been 
burned with a blowtorch, on the stomach and elsewhere, and beaten on 
the face so severely that his lips were swollen and his teeth were broken; 
his tongue had been cut out. Then, on April 4, another leader of GAM, 
Maria Rosario Godoy de Cuevas, her twenty-one-year-old brother, and 
her two-year-old son were picked up, tortured, and murdered. Her 
breasts had bite marks and her underclothing was bloody; her two-year- 
old son had had his fingernails pulled out. 




WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS S3 


On grounds of newsworthiness, the murders of the two GAM lead¬ 
ers, along with the brother and the child of one of them, would seem 
to deserve high-order attention. Their bravery was exceptional; the 
villainy they were opposing was extraordinary; the justice of their cause 
