no credible evidence and named no witnesses to any dealings with 
Bulgarians, so that the new “evidence" was simply Agca's assertions, 
after seventeen months in an Italian prison. 


THE KGB -BULGARIAN PLOT TO KILL THE POPE I47 


3 , The ideological assumptions* As the case looked extremely thin* 
especially before Agca’s new confession of November 1982, the gaps 
were filled by ideological assumptions: This is the kind of thing the 
Soviets do. The Soviet Union and Bulgaria have been actively striving 
to “destabilize” Turkey* 8 If there is no hard evidence it is because the 
Soviets are consummate professionals who cover their tracks and main¬ 
tain “plausible deniability.” The KGB hired Agca in Turkey and caused 
him to use a rightist cover to obscure the fact that he was a KGB agent. 
Although Agca traveled through eleven other countries* his stay in 
Bulgaria was crucial because Bulgaria is a totalitarian state and the 
police know everything; therefore they knew who Agca was, and they 
must have been using him for their own purposes. 9 


4.2* PROBLEMS WITH THE 
STERLING-HENZE-KALB 
MODEL 

The basic Sterling-Henze-Kalb model suffered from a complete ab¬ 
sence of credible evidence* a reliance on ideological premises* and 
internal inconsistencies* As problems arose* the grounds were shifted* 
sometimes with a complete reversal of argument* 10 

An initial problem for the model was the Bulgarian-Soviet motive. 
In this connection* we should note the extreme foolishness of Sterling’s 
original suggestion that the Eastern bloc went to the trouble of locating 
a Turkish Fascist to shoot the pope in order to make Turkey look bad* 
and thereby to loosen its ties to NATO. That such a loosened tie would 
follow from a Turkish Fascist shooting the pope is not sensible* nor is 
it likely that the conservative Soviet leadership would indulge in such 
a fanciful plan even if it had a greater probability of “success.” 11 This 
theory assumed thar Agca would be caught and identified as a Turk, 
but that he wouldn’t reveal that he had been hired by the Bulgarians 
and the Soviets. Subsequently* Sterling suggested that Agca was sup¬ 
posed to have been shot in the square to assure his silence. The amaz¬ 
ingly incompetent KGB failed to accomplish this simple task. SHK also 
maintained at various points that Agca may not even have known who 
hired him* so he couldn’t implicate the East. Later* when Agca claimed 
that he had been heavily involved with Bulgarians in Rome, Sterling 
and Henze lapsed into silence on the failure of the KGB to maintain 
a semblance of plausible deniability. 

