by such devices as B-52 raids targeted specifically on villages. 

An experienced U.S. official* cited by Buckley* compared My Lai to 
the exploits of the U.S. Ninth Infantry Division in a range of similar 
operations: 

The actions of the 9th Division in inflicting civilian casualties were 
worse. The sum total of what the 9th did was overwhelming. In 
sum* the horror was worse than My Lai. But with the 9th, the 
civilian casualties came in dribbles and were pieced out over a long 
time. And most of them were inflicted from the air and at night. 
Also* they were sanctioned by the command’s insistence on high 
body counts.... The result was an inevitable outcome of the unit’s 
command policy. 83 

In short* the My Lai massacre was ignored when it occurred* and the 
substantial attention given to it later is a more subtle form of cover-up 
of atrocities. An honest accounting* inconceivable in the media or “the 
culture” generally* would have placed the responsibility far higher than 
Lieutenant Galley* but it was more convenient to focus attention on the 
actions of semi-crazed GI’s in a gruesome combat situation with every 
Vietnamese civilian a threatening enemy. My Lai did not prompt the 
media generally—there were some individual exceptions—to take a 
deeper look at the nature of the war* or to display an interest in reports 
of similar events in nearby areas that suggested its unexceptional char¬ 
acter. This particular massacre was made exceptional by an arbitrary 
cutoff of attention and refusal to investigate beyond narrowly circum¬ 
scribed limits. The limited but dramatized attention to My Lai was even 
used to demonstrate the conscience of America* in the face of enemy 
provocations. Thus a 1973 New York Times report from My Lai de¬ 
scribes the “battered Batangan peninsula*” an area where the inhabi¬ 
tants were “generally supporters of the Vietcong,” now demolished by 
U.S. bombardment and ground operations: “big guns fire into the pe¬ 
ninsula as they have again and again over the eight years that American* 
South Korean and South Vietnamese forces have been trying to make 
it safe.” The report quotes villagers who accuse the Americans of 
having killed many people here: “They are in no position to appreciate 
what the name My Lai means to Americans,” the reporter adds thought¬ 
fully. 84 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (l): VIETNAM 199 


The standard critique of the media for having “lost the war” identi¬ 
fies television as the major culprit. Television analyst Edward Jay 
Epstein formulates the standard view as follows: 

Over the past 10 years, almost nightly* Americans have witnessed 
the war in Vietnam* on television* Never before in history has a 
nation allowed its citizens to view uncensored scenes of combat, 
destruction and atrocities in their living rooms, in living color* 
Since television has become the principal—and most believed— 
source of news for most Americans* it is generally assumed that 
the constant exposure of this war on television was instrumental 
in shaping public opinion* It has become almost a truism* and the 
standard rhetoric of television executives, to say that television* by 
showing the terrible truth of the war* caused the disillusionment 
of Americans with the war* * , , This has also been the dominant 
view of those governing the Nation during the war years* * , * 
Depending on whether the appraisal has come from hawk or dove, 
television has thus been either blamed or applauded for the disil¬ 
lusionment of the American public with the war* g5 

There have been several studies of the matter, suggesting a rather 
different picture* We will return to some of these issues in discussing 
the coverage of the Tet offensive, but we should observe that there are 
some rather serious questions about the standard formulations* Sup¬ 
pose that some Soviet investigators were to conduct an inquiry into 
coverage of the war in Afghanistan to determine whether Pravda 
should be blamed or applauded for the disillusionment of the Soviet 
public with the war? Would we consider such an inquiry to be mean¬ 
ingful without consideration of both the costs and the justice of the 
venture? 

Epstein notes an obvious “logical problem” with the standard view; 
for the first six years of television coverage* from 1962 and increasingly 
through 1967* “the American public did approve of the war in Vietnam” 
according to polls. Furthermore, in a 1967 Harris poll for Newsweek, “64 
per cent of the nation wide sample said that television’s coverage made 
them more supportive of the American effort, and only 26 per cent said 
that it had intensified their opposition,” leading the journal to conclude 
that “TV has encouraged a decisive majority of viewers to support the 
war*” 

Epstein's review of his and other surveys of television newscasts and 
commentary during this period explains why this should have been the 
case* “Up until 1965,” he writes, “the network anchor men seemed 



200 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


unanimous in support of American objectives in Vietnam/ 1 and most 
described themselves as “hawks” until the end, while the most notable 
“dove,” Walter Cronkite, applauded “the courageous decision that 
Communism's advance must be stopped in Asia” in 1965 and later 
endorsed the initial U.S. commitment “to stop Communist aggression 
