

between November i, 1982* and January 31* 1983, twelve had no news 
content whatever but were reports of somebody's opinion or specula¬ 
tion about the case—or refusal to speculate about the issue* (The Times 
carried one news article whose sole content was that President Reagan 
had “no comment 51 on the case.) More typical was the front-page article 
by Henry Kamm, “Bonn is Fearful of Bulgaria Tie with Terrorists” 
(Dec, 12* 1982)* or Bernard Gwertzman's “U.S, Intrigued But Uncertain 
on a Bulgarian Tie” (Dec. 26,1982). In “news report” after news report* 
unnamed individuals are “intrigued*” their interest is “piqued*” evi¬ 
dence is said to be “not wholly convincing*” or “final proof is still 
lacking,” Four of the news articles in the Times were on peripheral 
subjects such as smuggling in Bulgaria or papal-Soviet relations. Of the 
sixteen more direct news items* only one covered a solid news fact— 
namely, Antonov's arrest in Rome. The other fifteen news items were 
trivia* such as Kamm’s “Bulgarians Regret Tarnished Image” (Jan. 27* 
1983)* or another Kamm piece entitled “Italian Judge Inspects Apart¬ 
ment of Suspect in Bulgarian Case 55 (Jan. 12* 1983), All of these expres¬ 
sions of opinion* doubts* interest* suppositions, and minor detail served 
to produce a lot of smoke—which kept the issue of possible Soviet 
involvement before the public. They steered quite clear of substantive 
issues that bore on motives* quality of evidence* and Turkish and Italian 
context. 

During the years that followed* to the end of the trial in March 1986* 
the mass media, with only minor exceptions, adhered closely and un¬ 
critically to the SHK framework. 26 They not only failed to press alter¬ 
native questions* they also refused to examine closely the premises, 
logic* or evidence supporting the SHK case. Part of the reason for this 
was the media's extraordinary reliance on Sterling and Henze as 
sources (and Kalb's position as a news reporter on NBC-TV), and their 
unwillingness to ask these sources probing questions. 


4.5. BIASED SOURCING 

Sterling and Henze, and to a lesser extent Michael Ledeen, dominated 
perceptions of the Bulgarian Connection in the U.S. mass media to a 
remarkable degree. Moreover, they affected the course of events in 
Italy, as their version of Bulgarian guilt was aired in the Italian media 
before Agca named the Bulgarians and may have influenced Martella 
as well, 27 Sterling and Henze dominated media coverage by virtue of 
the very wide distribution of their articles and books on the case* and 



158 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


