
4. Iraq/Kurds* 
1990-1999 

132 

51 

66 

24 

5. Iraq Sanctions, 
1991-1999 

18 

l 

10 

1 


I* Mainstream media used in this tabulation* based on a Nexus database 
searchj were the Los Angeles Times y the New York Times, Washington Post , 
Newsweek, and Time. 

2 . The numbers in columns 2 and 3 do not add up to the total in column 1* 
which also includes letters* “World Briefings*” and summary items. 


The table shows that the five major print media surveyed engage in a 
similar biased usage, frequently using “genocide” to describe victimiza¬ 
tion in the enemy states, but applying the word far less frequently to 
equally severe victimization carried out by the United States or its allies 
and clients. We can even read who are U.S. friends and enemies from the 
media’s use of the word* Thus, with the United States and its NATO 
allies warring against Yugoslavia in 1999 , allegedly in response to that 
country’s mistreatment of the Kosovo Albanians, official denunciations 
of that mistreatment flowed through the media, along with the repeated 
designation ofthe abuses as “genocidal . 55 The same pattern applies to the 
Iraqi regime's abuse of its Kurdish population—after it had ceased to be a 
U*S* ally 29 —an enemy state, official denunciations, harsh sanctions, and 
parallel media treatment. 



XXII INTRODUCTION 


On the other hand, Turkey and Indonesia have long been U*S* allies 
and client states and recipients of military and economic aid* In conse¬ 
quence, and just as the propaganda model would predict, the media not 
only gave minimal attention to the severe abuse of the Kurds by Turkey 
throughout the 1990s, and to the Clinton administration's lavish help to 
Turkey's implementation of that ethnic-cleansing program, they rarely 
applied the word “genocide” to these Turkish operations* 

Similarly, the word was not often applied to the Indonesian mistreat¬ 
ment of the East Timorese, who were subjected to another wave of terror 
as Indonesia tried to prevent or defeat a LIN*-sponsored referendum on 
independence in 1999* The United States, after helping Suharto take 
power in 1965 in one of the great bloodbaths of the twentieth century, 30 
and after supporting his dictatorship for thirty-two years, also gave him 
crucial military and diplomatic aid when he invaded and occupied East 
Timor from 1975* 31 In 1999, as Indonesia attempted to prevent the in¬ 
dependence referendum in East Timor by violence, the United States 
maintained its military aid programs and refused to intervene to stop the 
killing, on the ground that what is happening “is the responsibility of the 
government of Indonesia, and we don s t want to take that responsibility 
away from them” (as stated by Defense Secretary William Cohen in a 
press conference of September 8, 1999). This was long after Indonesia 
had killed thousands and destroyed much of East Timor. Shortly there¬ 
after, under considerable international pressure, the United States in¬ 
vited Indonesia to leave the devastated country* 

We have shown elsewhere that in 1975 and later the U.S. media treated 
the East Timorese as unworthy victims, saving their attention and indig¬ 
nation for the almost simultaneous killings under Pol Pot in Cambodia* 
The victims of Pol Pot, a Communist leader, were worthy, although after 
he was ousted by the Vietnamese in 1978, Cambodians ceased to be wor¬ 
thy, as U.S. policy shifted toward support of Pol Pot in exile. 32 The East 
Timorese remained unworthy in the 1990s, as the table suggests. 

As the leader of the faction insisting on harsh sanctions against Iraq 
following the 1991 Persian Gulf War, the United States itself was respon¬ 
sible for a very large number of Iraqi civilians deaths in the 1990s. John 
and Karl Mueller assert that these “sanctions of mass destruction” have 
caused the deaths of “more people in Iraq than have been slain by all 
so-called weapons of mass destruction [nuclear and chemical] through¬ 
out all history*” 33 A large fraction of the million or more killed by sanc¬ 
tions were young children; UNICEF Executive Director Carol Bellamy 
pointed out that “if the substantial reduction in child mortality through¬ 
out Iraq during the 1980s had continued through the 1990s, there would 
have been half a million fewer deaths of children under five in the country 




