
16. The members of the very top tier qualify by audience outreach, importance 
as setters of news standards, and asset and profit totals. The last half dozen 
or so in our twenty-four involve a certain amount of arbitrariness of choice, 
although audience size is still our primary criterion. McGraw-Hill is included 



NUltS TO PAGES 5-8 


because of its joint strength in trade books and magazines of political content 
and outreach. 

17. As noted in table 1-1, note 7, Storer came under the temporary control of 
the securities firm Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. in 1985. As its ultimate fate 
was unclear at the time of writing, and as financial data were no longer 
available after 1984, we have kept Storer on the table and list it here, despite 
its uncertain status. 

18. John Kluge, having taken the Metromedia system private in a leveraged 
buyout in 1984 worth $1.1 billion, sold off various parts of this system in 1985-86 
for $5.5 billion, at a personal profit of some $3 billion (Gary Hector, “Are 
Shareholders Cheated by LBOs?” Fortune, Jan. 17, 1987, p. 100). Station 
KDLA-TV, in Los Angeles, which had been bought by a management-outsider 
group in a leveraged buyout in 1983 for $245 million, was sold to the Tribune 
Company for $510 million two years later (Richard Stevenson, “Tribune in TV 
Deal for $510 Million,” New York Times , May 7,1985). See also “The Media 
Magnates: Why Huge Fortunes Roll Off the Presses,” Fortune, October 12, 
1987. 

19. A split among the the heirs of James E. Scripps eventually resulted in the 
sale of the Detroit Evening News . According to one news article, “Daniel 
Marentette, a Scripps family member and a self described ‘angry shareholder/ 
says family members want a better return on their money. ‘We get better yields 
investing in a New York checking account/ says Mr. Marentette, who sells 
race horses” (Damon Darlin, “Takeover Rumors Hit Detroit News Parent,” 
Wall Street Journal, July 18, 1985). The Bingham family division on these 
matters led to the sale of the Louisville Courier-Journal', the New Haven papers 
of the Jackson family were sold after years of squabbling, and “the sale price 
[of the New Haven papers], $185 million, has only served to publicize the 
potential value of family holdings of family newspapers elsewhere” (Geraldine 
Fabrikant, “Newspaper Properties, Hotter Than Ever,” New York Times, Aug. 
17, 1986). 

20. The Reagan administration strengthened the control of existing holders of 
television-station licenses by increasing their term from three to five years, and 
its FCC made renewals essentially automatic. The FCC also greatly facilitated 
speculation and trading in television properties by a rule change reducing the 
required holding period before sale of a newly acquired property from three 
years to one year. 

The Reagan era FCC and Department of Justice also refused to challenge 
mergers and takeover bids that would significantly increase the concentration 
of power (GE-RCA) or media concentration (Capital Cities-ABC). Further¬ 
more, beginning April 2, 1985, media owners could own as many as twelve 
television stations, as long as their total audience didn’t exceed 25 percent of 
the nation’s television households; and they could also hold twelve AM and 
twelve FM stations, as the 1953 “7-7-7 rule” was replaced with a “12-12-12 
rule.” See Herbert H. Howard, “Group and Cross-Media Ownership of Tele¬ 
vision Stations: 1985” (Washington: National Association of Broadcasters, 
I98 5). 

21. This was justified by Reagan-era FCC chairman Mark Fowler on the 
grounds that market options are opening up and that the public should be free 
to choose. Criticized by Fred Friendly for doing away with the law’s public- 


NOTES TO PAGES 8-II 337 


interest standard, Fowler replied that Friendly “distrusts the ability of the 
viewing public to make decisions on its own through the marketplace mecha¬ 
nism. I do not” (Jeanne Saddler, “Clear Channel: Broadcast Takeovers Meet 
Less FCC Static, and Critics Are Upset,” Wall Street Journal, June n, 1985). 
Among other problems, Fowler ignores the fact that true freedom of choice 
involves the ability to select options that may not be offered by an oligopoly 
selling audiences to advertisers. 

22. CBS increased its debt by about $1 billion in 1985 to finance the purchase 
of 21 percent of its own stock, in order to fend off a takeover attempt by Ted 
Turner. The Wall Street Journal noted that “With debt now standing at 60% 
of capital, it needs to keep advertising revenue up to repay borrowings and 
interest” (Peter Barnes, “CBS Profit Hinges on Better TV Ratings,” June 6, 
1986). With the slowed-up growth of advertising revenues, CBS embarked on 
an employment cutback of as many as six hundred broadcast division em¬ 
ployees, the most extensive for CBS since the loss of cigarette advertising in 
1971 (Peter Barnes, “CBS Will Cut up to 600 Posts in Broadcasting,” Wall 
Street Journal, July 1,1986). In June 1986, Time, Inc., embarked on a program 
to buy back as much as 10 million shares, or 16 percent of its common stock, 
at an expected cost of some $900 million, again to reduce the threat of a hostile 
takeover (Laura Landro, “Time Will Buy as Much as 16% of Its Common,” 
Wall Street Journal, June 20, 1986). 

23. In response to the Jesse Helms and Turner threats to CBS, Laurence 
Tisch, of Loews Corporation, was encouraged to increase his holdings in CBS 
stock, already at 11.7 percent. In August 1986, the Loews interest was raised 
to 24.9 percent, and Tisch obtained a position of virtual control. In combina¬ 
tion with William Paley, who owned 8.1 percent of the shares, the chief 
executive officer of CBS was removed and Tisch took over that role himself, 
