
xxvi introduction 


“his party” will “heed his pleas,” a process of distancing the favored can¬ 
didate from responsibility for any abuses to come. In the editorials that 
followed, the Times did not suggest possible ongoing electoral fraud, 
“manipulated patronage " or media controls and bias, although this elec¬ 
tion was famous for a convenient “computer breakdown” in the election 
aftermath, which turned Carlos Salinas from an expected loser into a 
winner. Just three years later, however, at the time of the 1991 election, 
the editors stated that “as long as anyone can remember, Mexican elec¬ 
tions have been massively fraudulent” as it prepared readers for new 
promises of a cleanup. 46 But all through this period and later, the Times 
(and its media rivals) did not focus on fraud or call these elections rigged; 
in both news stories and editorials they portrayed these deeply flawed 
elections as steps toward democracy and legitimizing. 

In the 1983 Turkish election, held under military rule, with harsh 
censorship and only three parties “led by politicians sympathetic to the 
military government” allowed to run, the Times found that “Turkey Ap¬ 
proaches Democracy.” 47 Similarly, in Uruguay’s 1984 election, under 
another military regime that jailed the leading opposition candidate and 
also refused to allow a second major candidate to run, but organized by a 
government approved by the US. State Department, the Times once 
again found that “Uruguay is resuming its democratic vocation . . . the 
generals are yielding to the infectious resurgence of democracy in much 
of Latin America ” 48 

The Russian election of 1996 was important to the United States and 
its allies, as Boris Yeltsin, the ruler who was carrying out their favored 
policies of privatization and the integration of Russia into the global 
financial system, was seriously threatened with defeat. The Yeltsin gov¬ 
ernment had presided over a 50 percent fall in national output and large 
income declines for 90 percent of the population, while the hugely 
corrupt privatization process provided windfalls to a small minority, in¬ 
cluding an important criminal class. The social welfare and health care 
systems had disintegrated under Yeltsin’s rule, contributing to a startling 
rise in infectious diseases and mortality rates. Just before the 1996 elec¬ 
tion campaign, Yeltsin’s popularity rating was 8 percent That he could 
win reelection in such circumstances suggests—and reflects—a seriously 
flawed election. 

However, with the Yeltsin regime strongly backed by the U.S. govern¬ 
ment and its Western allies, the New York Times once again found this 
election “A Victory for Russian Democracy,” and so did the US. main¬ 
stream media in general. For that paper of record, electoral flaws were 
slighted or ignored, and its editors declared the very fact of holding 
an “imperfect” election “a remarkable achievement.” 49 The same bias 

