threat, from the time trade unions were allowed to organize in 1947, and 
Arbenz’s modest and effective land reform was the last straw, 75 With 
U*S, initiative, organization, funding, and direct psychological warfare 
and terror operations, a tiny mercenary army ousted Arbenz and in¬ 
stalled an “anti-Communist” regime. 

From 1954 to the present day, neither reform nor democracy, let 
alone radical change, has been possible in Guatemala, The main reason 
for this is that the forces into whose hands the United States delivered 
that country in 1954 “bitterly opposed any change that might affect, 
however slightly, their entrenched position,” 76 and they had learned 
from the 1945-54 lesson that democracy moves inexorably toward re¬ 
form and threats to privilege in a system of extreme inequality. The 
very brief interludes of tentative openness after 1954 witnessed the 
quick emergence of protective organizations of urban workers and the 
peasantry, strikes, and reformist and radical parties and organizations. 
As Piero Gleijeses puts it, “in the last months of the Arana period 
[1970-74], the repression had acquired a more selective character, and 
on repeated occasions Laugerud [Arana's successor, 1974-78] refrained 
from ‘settling' strikes by force*” 77 But the feebleness of the reforms and 
the awakened hopes and pressures forced a further choice; and “given 
the nature of the regime,” the wave of terror that followed “was the 
only logical choice” for the Guatemalan ruling class. 78 

Another reason for the failures of both reform and democracy has 
been ongoing U.S, influence. The U.S. establishment found the plural¬ 
ism and democracy of the years 1945-54 intolerable, and it eventually 
ended that experiment. 79 In the succeeding thirty-two years of U.S, 
guidance, not only has Guatemala gradually become a terrorist state 
rarely matched in the scale of systematic murder of civilians, but its 
terrorist proclivities have increased markedly at strategic moments of 
escalated U.S* intervention. The first point was the invasion and coun¬ 
terrevolution of 1954, which reintroduced political murder and large- 
scale repression to Guatemala following the decade of democracy. The 
second followed the emergence of a small guerrilla movement in the 
early 1960s, when the United States began serious counterinsurgency 
(Cl) training of the Guatemalan army. In 1966, a further small guerrilla 
movement brought the Green Berets and a major Cl war in which 
10,000 people were killed in pursuit of three or four hundred guerrillas* 
It was at this point that the “death squads” and “disappearances” made 
their appearance in Guatemala, The United States brought in police 



WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS 73 


training in the 1970s, which was followed by the further institutionaliza¬ 
tion of violence* The “solution 51 to social problems in Guatemala, 
specifically attributable to the 1954 intervention and the form of U.S. 
