exclude phase I and its long-term effects, and bypassing the U.S. role 
in support of Pol Pot—in part via its Chinese allies, who have been 



296 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


admirably frank in explaining their stand. This carefully channeled 
benevolence succeeded in the goal of keeping the Pol Pot forces active 
and injuring Vietnam and also, incidentally, the suffering people of 
Cambodia who are the objects of our profound concern. The relief 
effort in 1979-80 did succeed in aiding Cambodians in distress, but it 
has also sustained the Pol Pot forces and thereby impeded Cambodia’s 
recovery and, perhaps, its independence, although about this we can 
only speculate. 

Putting aside the undoubtedly sincere reactions of many people who 
were exposed to evidence of properly selected atrocities that passed 
through the media filter, the only rational conclusion from this il¬ 
luminating record is that the West was consumed with horror over 
Khmer Rouge atrocities during phase II not because of a sudden pas¬ 
sion for the fate of the suffering people of Cambodia—as the record 
during phase I, and elsewhere, makes sufficiently clear—but because 
the Khmer Rouge had a useful role to play: namely, to permit a retro¬ 
spective justification for earlier French and American crimes in Indo¬ 
china, and to facilitate the reconstruction of Western ideology after the 
Vietnam trauma, so as to overcome the dread “Vietnam syndrome” and 
prepare the ground for a “resurgent America” pursuing its historical 
vocation of defending freedom and justice. The actual facts were, and 
remain, of little interest, for the same reason. 






Conclusions 


D EFENDING THE MEDIA AGAINST THE CHARGE THAT THEY HAVE 
become too independent and too powerful for the public good* Anthony 
Lewis of the New York Times writes that 

The press is protected [by the First Amendment] not for its own 
sake but to enable a free political system to operate* In the end* 
the concern is not for the reporter or the editor but for the 
citizen-critic of government. 

What is ar stake when we speak about freedom of the press “is the 
freedom to perform a function on behalf of the polity/* 1 Lewis cites 
Supreme Court Justice Powell, who observed: “no individual can obtain 
for himself the information needed for the intelligent discharge of his 
political responsibilities. * * * By enabling the public to assert meaningful 
control over the political process, the press performs a crucial function 
in effecting the societal purpose of the First Amendment.” Therefore, 
as Judge Gurfein ruled in supporting the right of the New York Times 



298 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


to publish the Pentagon Papers after the government had failed to show 
any threat of a breach of security but only the possibility of embarrass¬ 
ment: “a cantankerous press, an obstinate press, a ubiquitous press 
must be suffered by those in authority in order to preserve the even 
greater values of freedom of expression and the right of the people to 
know.” 

We do not accept the view that freedom of expression must be 
defended in instrumental terms, by virtue of its contribution to some 
higher good; rather, it is a value in itself. But that apart, these ringing 
declarations express valid aspirations, and beyond that, they surely 
express the self-image of the American media. Our concern in this book 
has been to inquire into the relation between this image and the reality. 
In contrast to the standard conception of the media as cantankerous, 
obstinate, and ubiquitous in their search for truth and their inde¬ 
pendence of authority, we have spelled out and applied a propaganda 
model that indeed sees the media as serving a “societal purpose,” but 
not that of enabling the public to assert meaningful control over the 
political process by providing them with the information needed for the 
intelligent discharge of political responsibilities. On the contrary, a 
propaganda model suggests that the “societal purpose” of the media is 
to inculcate and defend the economic, social, and political agenda of 
privileged groups that dominate the domestic society and the state. The 
media serve this purpose in many ways: through selection of topics, 
distribution of concerns, framing of issues, filtering of information, 
emphasis and tone, and by keeping debate within the bounds of accept¬ 
able premises. We have sought to show that the expectations of this 
model are realized, and often considerably surpassed, in the actual 
practice of the media in a range of crucial cases. We quite agree with 
Chief Justice Hughes, whom Lewis also cites, on “the primary need of 
a vigilant and courageous press” if democratic processes are to function 
in a meaningful way. But the evidence we have reviewed indicates that 
this need is not met or even weakly approximated in actual practice. 

It is frequently asserted that the media were not always as indepen¬ 
dent, vigilant, and defiant of authority as they allegedly are today; 
rather, the experiences of the past generation are held to have taught 
