Nation, October 3,1985, unpublished. For evaluation of the international relief 
efforts, see Vickery, Cambodia; Kiljunen, Kampuchea; Joel Charny and John 
Spragens, Obstacles to Recovery in Vietnam and Kampuchea: U.S . Embargo of 
Humanitarian Aid (Boston: Oxfam America, 1984); Shawcross, Quality of 
Mercy. 

26. Francois Ponchaud, on whom Shawcross relied, is a highly dubious source 
for reasons that have been extensively documented; see note 22. No one with 
a record of duplicity approaching his would ever be relied on for undocu¬ 
mented charges of any significance if the target were not an official enemy. 

27. Shawcross, Quality of Mercy, pp. 49-50. He observes that “those years of 
warfare saw the destruction of Cambodian society and the rise of the Khmer 
Rouge from its ashes, in good part as a result of White House policies”; “with 
the forces of nationalism unleashed by the war at their command, the Khmer 
Rouge became an increasingly formidable army,” while in the “massive Ameri¬ 
can bombing campaign” to which the Khmer Rouge were subjected through 
August 1973, “their casualties are thought to have been huge.” The phrase 
“their casualties” presumably refers to Khmer Rouge military forces; there is 
no mention of civilian casualties. On the limited scope of Shawcross’s “quality 
of mercy,” see “Phase III at home” (p. 288), below. 

28. Vickery, Cambodia, p. 293. 

29. AP, Boston Globe, September 24, 1978, citing the Report of the Interna¬ 
tional Labor Organization in Geneva on over fifty million child laborers in the 
world, with Thailand singled out as one of the worst offenders, thanks to 
grinding poverty, an effective military government backed by the United 
States, lack of labor union power, and “wide-open free enterprise.” See PEHR, 
II.63 359> for excerpts and other examples that have elicited even less interest, 
and PEHR, II, xv, on a World Bank description of the situation in Thailand. 
On the brutal treatment of many of the estimated 10.7 million child laborers 
in Thailand, see Human Rights in Thailand Report 9.1. (January-March 1985) 
(Coordinating Group for Religion in Society, Bangkok); Thai Development 
Newsletter 3.1 1985 (December 1986) (Bangkok). On the treatment of women 
in “the brothel of Asia,” with its estimated 500,000 prostitutes, masseuses, and 
bar-waitresses, 20 percent of them under fourteen years of age, drawn to 
Bangkok (and sometimes sold off to Europe) from the impoverished rural areas 
through “a huge underground network of brothels and workshops feeding on 
child flesh and labor,” see several articles in Beyond Stereotypes: Asian Women 
in Development, Southeast Asia Chronicle (January 1985). 

30. For extensive evidence on this matter, see PEHR, II.6, and Vickery, 
Cambodia, extending the story to phase III. 

31. Others give higher estimates. Ponchaud gives the figure of 800,000 killed, 
but, as noted in our 1977 review, he seems to have exaggerated the toll of the 
U.S. bombing, and as shown in the references of note 22, he is a highly 
unreliable source. “US Government sources put the figure unofficially at 
600,000 to 700,000” (CIA demographic study, which accepts the lower figure). 
