
108. For a more detailed discussion of the Times’s articles on these subjects, 
see Edward S. Herman, “ ‘Objective’ News as Systematic Propaganda: The 
New York Times on the 1984 Salvadoran and Nicaraguan Elections,” Covert 
Action Information Bulletin 21 (Spring, 1984). 

109. In a larger framework, too, Nicaragua is playing the dangerous game of 
trying to defend itself against external attack, resisting the demands of the 
godfather. The absurdity of the claim that Nicaragua would become a military 
“threat” to its neighbors with added MIGs, when the Reagan administration 
has been looking for an excuse to attack Nicaragua and would welcome any 
such Nicaraguan move as an opportunity to intervene directly, never strikes 
the U.S. mass media. The possibility that the administration wants to constrain 
Nicaraguan arms imports to reduce its capacity to defend itself against ongoing 
aggression against it also never arises for the press. Note that unlike guerrilla 
forces, the contras can survive only with regular airdrops, reaching the level 
of thirty to forty a month by mid-1987, and two or three times that amount 
after August, as the U.S. sought to undermine the Guatemala accords. Hence 
Nicaragua would have good reason to obtain vintage 1950s jet planes to defend 
itself from the U.S. proxy army. 

no. For an account of the performance of U.S. official and semi-official ob¬ 
servers in the Dominican Republic, Vietnam, El Salvador, and Zimbabwe, see 


Herman and Brodhead, Demonstration Elections . Appendix i provides a sum¬ 
mary of the views of an official U.S. observer team to Guatemala in July 1984. 
All of these fully confirm the statement made in the text. 
hi. LASA, Report, p. 5. 


Chapter 4: The K G B - B u 1 g a r i a n Plot to 
Kill the Pope 

1. Some qualification is required by the fact that the three principal sources 
hired by and/or relied upon by the private media—Claire Sterling, Paul 
Henze, and Michael Ledeen—all had long-standing relations with the govern¬ 
ment, and that various Italian government organizations such as the intelli¬ 
gence agency SISMI played a role in the genesis and propagandizing of the 
charges, as described in the text below. 

2. The limited exceptions to these generalizations will be noted below. 

3. See further, Edward S. Herman and Frank Brodhead, The Rise and Fall of 
the Bulgarian Connection (New York: Sheridan Square Publications, 1986), pp. 
66-71; also Philip Pauli, “International Terrorism: The Propaganda War” 
(M.A. thesis in international relations, San Francisco State University, June 
19S2). 

4. The reasons why this was important to Begin are discussed in the works 
