With regard to the American war, the PBS series makes a conscious 
effort to be balanced, to present all sides, to take no side* The French, 
in contrast, are treated far more harshly, as brutal colonialists, with no 
pretense of balance* Peter Biskind comments: 

Whereas the narrator referred to Ho Chi Minh and his followers 
as "rebels,” "nationalists,” or "the Vietnamese resistance,” as long 
as they were fighting the French, once the Americans arrive they 
are invariably "Communists” or just "the enemy.” Whereas Bao 
Dai is the “playboy emperor picked by the French,” Nguyen Cao 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (l): VIETNAM 249 


Ky and Nguyen Van Thieu are simply the “government.” 
Whereas French troops just released from Japanese prison camps 
go “on a rampage, arresting and attacking Vietnamese,” American 
troops engage in the was-it-or-wasn’t-it massacre at Thuy Bo. 

The effort to maintain balance is illustrated, for example, in the narra¬ 
tor’s concluding words to episode 4, covering Johnson’s escalation of 
the war in 1964-65 and the first appearance of North Vietnamese units 
in the South in mid-1965. After presenting Lyndon Johnson and other 
U.S. government spokesmen, the narrator states: 

Johnson called it invasion. Hanoi called it liberation. In the fall 
of 1965, three North Vietnamese regiments massed in the Central 
Highlands. Nearly two years had passed since Johnson renewed 
the U.S. commitment to defend South Vietnam. Nearly two years 
had passed since Ho Chi Minh renewed his commitment to liber¬ 
ate the South. Now their two armies braced for battle.... For the 
first time, in the Battle of the la Drang Valley, Americans fought 
the North Vietnamese—face to face. For the first time, B-52S 
supported troops in the field. And for the first time, to Americans, 
Vietnam meant a major new war. 

Here we have “balance,” but of a special kind. One may believe, with 
Johnson, that North Vietnam is invading the South, or, with Ho, that 
North Vietnam is fighting to liberate the South. We may not believe, 
however, that the United States is invading South Vietnam, which, we 
learn two episodes later, it had been bombing since 1961. Rather, we 
must assume, as a given fact not subject to debate, that the U.S. com¬ 
mitment was “to defend South Vietnam.” 

To evaluate this effort at “balance,” we may observe that during the 
preceding summer (1965), five months after the United States began the 
regular bombing of North Vietnam, the Pentagon estimated that the 
60,000 U.S. troops then deployed faced an enemy combat force of 
