necessary. 100 

There were ample grounds at the time for suspicion about the U.S. 
government version. The foreign press was able to see that serious 
questions arose. Le Monde presented public statements on all sides 
and an analysis of what the public record indicated. “Neither the 
Times nor the Post made any such analysis of the record,” simply 
taking the false Washington version to be correct and dismissing the 
accurate Communist “allegations” with a bare mention. 101 In London, 
the New Statesman covered the U.S. and Chinese versions, including 
the (accurate) Chinese account of the U.S.-Saigon actions that 
preceded the incidents and the charge that the first was provoked by 
Washington while the second never occurred, and concluding that 
“the incidents in Vietnam do not seem quite as simple as the initial 
headlines indicated” (a substantial understatement). In the United 
States, the left-wing National Guardian, with five major articles, and 
LF. Stone’s Weekly provided the most extensive, careful, and accurate 
account of the events. In contrast to the fevered rhetoric of the main¬ 
stream newsweeklies, the National Guardian simply described the 
facts that were available, asking whether the August 2 “skirmish” had 
been provoked and whether the “alleged” August 4 incident had 
taken place. The relevant background and Communist versions were 
accurately presented, with appropriate questions raised. Wayne 
Morse’s commentary was given ample coverage, as were South Viet¬ 
namese General Ky 5 s statements on sabotage missions in North Viet¬ 
nam. LF. Stone’s Weekly also reported the facts accurately, adding 
relevant background ignored by the major media, 102 

In summary, the national media, overcome by jingoist passion, failed 
to provide even minimally adequate coverage of this crucial event, 
although appropriate skepticism would have been aroused in the mind 
of the reader of the foreign or “alternative” media, or the reader with 
the sophistication to treat the media as a disinformation system disguis¬ 
ing a reality that can perhaps be ascertained with sufficient energy and 
dedication. The Pentagon Papers analyst describes these events as “an 
important firebreak,” noting that “the Tonkin Gulf Resolution set U.S. 
public support for virtually any action.” 103 

The willingness of the media to serve as a vehicle for government 
propaganda helped impel the country toward what they were later to 
regard as “the tragedy” of Vietnam, The reaction of Congress and the 



210 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


public laid the basis for the outright invasion of early 1965, providing 
support for the planners who were secretly concerned that the NLF was 
continuing “to seek a political settlement favorable to the communists 51 
