
has crushed all opposition of every kind, however anti-Commu- 
nist it might be. He has been able to do this, simply and solely 
because of the massive dollar aid he has had from across the 
Pacific, which kept in power a man who, by all the laws of 
human and political affairs, would long ago have fallen. Diem’s 
main supporters are to be found in North America, not in Free 
Vietnam, , . , 30 

The leading U.S. government specialist on Vietnamese Communism, 
Douglas Pike, whose denunciations of the “Viet Cong” often reached 
the level of hysteria, conceded that the NLF “maintained that its 
contest with the GVN and the United States should be fought out at 
the political level and that the use of massed military might was in itself 
illegitimate,” until forced by the United States and its clients “to use 
counterforce to survive.” 31 

The Kennedy administration escalated the war in South Vietnam, 
engaging U.S. military forces directly in bombing, defoliation, and 
“advising” combat troops from 1961 to 1962 as part of an effort to drive 
several million people into concentration camps (“strategic hamlets”) 
in which they could be “protected” behind barbed wire and armed 
guard from the guerrillas whom, the United States conceded, they were 
willingly supporting, Douglas Pike assessed indigenous support for the 
NLF at about 50 percent of the population at the time—which is more 
than George Washington could have claimed—while the United States 
could rally virtually no indigenous support. He explained that political 
options were hopeless, since the NLF was the only “truly mass-based 
political party in South Vietnam,” and no one, “with the possible 
exception of the Buddhists, thought themselves equal in size and power 
to risk entering a coalition, fearing that if they did the whale [the NLF] 
would swallow the minnow.” As for the Buddhists, the United States 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (i): VIETNAM l8l 


regarded them “as equivalent to card-carrying Communists” (Ambas¬ 
sador Henry Cabot Lodge),, and later backed the use of force to destroy 
their political movement* to ensure that no independent political force 
would remain* since no such force could be controlled. 32 In a highly 
regarded military history and moral tract in justification of the Ameri¬ 
can war* Guenter Lewy describes the purpose of the U,S, air operations 
of the early 1960s* which involved “indiscriminate killing 55 and “took 
a heavy toll of essentially innocent men* women and children, 55 in a 
manner that Orwell would have appreciated: villages in “open zones 55 
were “subjected to random bombardment by artillery and aircraft so as 
to drive the inhabitants into the safety of the strategic hamlets/ 533 
It was conceded on all sides that the government imposed by the 
United States lacked any significant popular support. The experienced 
U.S. pacification chief John Paul Vann, widely regarded as the U.S. 
official most knowledgeable about the situation in South Vietnam, 
wrote in 1965 that 

A popular political base for the Government of South Vietnam 
does not now exist. . . . The existing government is oriented 
toward the exploitation of the rural and lower class urban popula¬ 
tions. It is* in fact, a continuation of the French colonial system 
of government with upper class Vietnamese replacing the French. 
... The dissatisfaction of the agrarian population .., is expressed 
largely through alliance with the NLF. 34 

Virtually all parties concerned* apart from the United States, were 
making serious efforts in the early 7960s to avoid an impending war by 
neutralizing South Vietnam* Laos, and Cambodia—the official stand of 
the National Liberation Front, the “Viet Cong” of U.S- propaganda, 
essentially the southern branch of the Viet Minh. But the United States 
was committed to preventing any political settlement. 

Unable to develop any political base in the south, the U.S, govern¬ 
ment proceeded to expand the war. It was able to do this by continually 
manipulating the political scene in South Vietnam to assure the attain¬ 
ment of its objective: continued fighting until an anti-Communist re¬ 
gime, susceptible to American will, was established in the South. 
Ambassador Lodge observed in January 1964 that “It is obvious that the 
generals are all we have got/ 535 And we would keep replacing them until 
we got the right ones, “right 55 meaning that they were willing to follow 
orders and fight, not negotiate. One of Diem’s early replacements told 
newsmen that he found out that he was going to be the next head of 
state only when his U.S, adviser “told me that a coup d’etat was planned 



I &2 manufacturing consent 


in Saigon and that I was to become President . * .” General Maxwell 
Taylor spoke quite frankly about the need of “establishing some rea¬ 
sonably satisfactory government/ 5 replacing it if we are not satisfied, 
either with civilians, or with “a military dictatorship, 5536 

It should be noted in this connection that after the long-standing 
U.S, manipulation of governments in its client state had finally suc¬ 
ceeded in its aim, and the United States had placed in power two former 
French collaborators, Ky and Thieu, whose sole qualification for rule 
was that they met the U-S, condition of willingness to fight and evade 
political settlement, the U.S, media continued to pretend that the gov¬ 
ernment of South Vietnam was a free choice of the South Vietnamese 
people. 37 Thus the New York Times commented editorially on June 4, 
