
Repeatedly, the study claims that the media were “vengeful” or bent on 
“retribution” in reacting skeptically to government claims. An alternative 
possibility is that this reaction reflected a newfound realism. Braestrup agrees, 
for example, that “Westmoreland was wrong in publicly underestimating (in 
November [1967]) the enemy” ( 1 ,69), and cites many other false and mislead- 



328 APPENDIX 3 


APPENDIX 3 329 


ing optimistic statements, among them Robert Komer’s prediction of “steady 
progress in pacification” a week before the Tet offensive (I, 72; Braestrup’s 
paraphrase). In fact, part of the shock of the Tet offensive resulted from the 
faith of the media in previous government assessments, undermined by the Tet 
offensive, as the U.S. military and official Washington were well aware. 

Furthermore, General Westmoreland’s accounts were hardly persuasive 
during the offensive. Thus he claimed that “all 11 of the Vietnamese division 
commanders . . . commanded their units effectively,” whereas, as a journalist 
learned, one “had gone into a state of shock during the Tet attacks” ( 1 ,454-55). 
Or consider Westmoreland’s claim that allegations about inaccuracy and in¬ 
flation of body counts were “one of the great distortions of the war” by the 
media—there were at most “relatively small inaccuracies” (II, 163). His own 
generals had a rather different view. In his study of the opinions of the 
generals, General Douglas Kinnard reports that 61 percent of those responding 
describe the body count as “often inflated,” and only 26 percent “within reason 
accurate.” The responses include: “a fake—totally worthless,” “often blatant 
lies,” “a blot on the honor of the Army,” and “grossly exaggerated by many 
units primarily because of the incredible interest shown by people like 
McNamara and Westmoreland.” Perhaps journalists had some reason for 
skepticism, apart from “vengefulness.” 9 

To demonstrate the absurd extent of press efforts to find shock value, 
Braestrup cites a story in Time on enemy tunneling at Khe Sanh, “as occurred 
around Dienbienphu” ( 1 ,435; his emphasis), in general ridiculing the analogy— 
but forgetting to ridicule the remark by Marine Commander General Cush¬ 
man, who said that “He is digging trenches and doing other tricks of the trade 
which he learned to do at Dienbienphu” (I, 403). 

“All Vietnam, it appeared on film at home, was in flames or being battered 
into ruins, and all Vietnamese civilians were homeless refugees,” Braestrup 
alleges (1,234), in typically fanciful rhetoric, adding that “there were virtually 
no films shown or photographs published during this period of undamaged 
portions of Saigon, Hue, or other cities” (his emphasis). This shows that 
coverage was unbalanced, supportive of the enemy. One wonders how many 
films and photographs of peaceful English villages or Hawaiian towns ap¬ 
peared on the days that Coventry and Pearl Harbor were bombed, to balance 
the picture. 

Braestrup seeks the causes for the “exoneration of the Vietcong” for “killing 
noncombatants or causing the exodus of refugees” (I, 234), overlooking the 
fact that before seeking the cause of x it is necessary to show that x is true. 
In this case, it is not. The accounts he cites regularly blame the Viet Cong for 
civilian suffering and emphasize Viet Cong atrocities. In fact, he himself points 
out that “both Time and Newsweek put the onus on the Vietcong” in Saigon 
( 1 ,246)—as elsewhere. Newsweek titled an article “The VC’s Week of Terror 
(Feb. 12) and described VC terror squads executing civilians in Saigon ( 1 , 49 °)- 
Typically, the media blamed the Viet Cong for having “brought bullets and 
bombs into the very midst of heavily populated areas, causing indiscriminate 
slaughter of civilians caught in the cross fire and making homeless twice oyer 
the refugees who had fled to the cities for safety...” (Time, [ 1 ,246]), adopting 
the position of U.S. government propaganda that the enemy is to blame if the 
United States kills and destroys, and failing to add that the refugees had fled 


to the cities for safety from massive U.S. violence and that such refugee 
generation was explicit policy. 10 In the New York Times, Charles Mohr wrote 
that “In one sense the Vietcong have been responsible for civilian deaths by 
launching the urban attacks,” citing American officials who are “sure that the 
population will be bitter about the guerrillas because of their ‘callous disregard 
for human life’ ” (I, 243). Meanwhile, AP, the Washington Post, NBC, and 
others reported Viet Cong causing destruction, using civilians as shields, pre¬ 
venting civilians from fleeing attack, murdering civilians, etc., often on the 
basis of flimsy evidence that would elicit much Freedom House derision if used 
to support accounts of American atrocities. In a typical misrepresentation, 
Braestrup claims that NBC-TV “attributed Saigon’s losses solely to an allied 
military decision to ‘kill or maim some of the people’ to protect the rest” (our 
emphasis), citing Howard Tuckner’s statement that there was a decision “that 
in order to protect most of the . . . people, they had to kill or maim some of 
the people”—a statement that is quite different from the paraphrase and is 
noteworthy only for its standard reference to “protecting” the victims (1,249). 

In general, far from “exonerating the Vietcong,” the media bent over back¬ 
wards to blame them for the casualties and destruction caused by the U.S. 
forces who were “protecting” and “defending” South Vietnam and its popula¬ 
tion, according to unquestioned dogma. While the reporting was generally 
accurate in a narrow sense, the framework and the general picture presented 
are outlandish, and conform closely to the demands of the state propaganda 
system. It is, once again, highly revealing that Freedom House regards such 
service to the state as unremarkable—indeed, insufficient, by its standards. 

The more general summaries in the Freedom House study leave the evi¬ 
dence presented far behind. Thus the ruins and destruction “were presented 
as symbolic evidence of a stunning ‘defeat’ (variously implied or defined) for 
allied forces” (I, 621). “The Americans, by their heavy use of firepower in a 
