ance on force to compensate for its political weakness. As part of its 
immediate efforts to sabotage this agreement, the State Department 
called the Latin American ambassadors to Washington, where they 
were presented with “a copy of the 1973 Paris peace agreement that was 
negotiated to end the U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War,” the Wall 
Street Journal reported, adding that “the agreement was subsequently 



236 manufacturing consent 


ignored by North Vietnam*” The Journal explained that this unfortu¬ 
nate “Vietnam experience,” which proved that agreements with Com¬ 
munists are not worth the paper they are printed on, is one factor in 
administration “skepticism” about the Central American agreement. 
Copies of the 1973 Paris Agreements were distributed to the envoys “as 
a case study of how an agreement with ambiguous provisions could be 
exploited and even ignored by a Communist government,” Neil Lewis 
reported in the lead story in the New York Times> adding: “In violation 
of the 1973 accord, North Vietnam overran South Vietnam and united 
the two parts of Vietnam under its banner in 1975*” 151 The utility of a 
carefully crafted historical record, designed by the loyal media to serve 
the needs of state power, is revealed here with much clarity. 

Surveying these events, we reach essentially the same conclusions as 
before, although once again the performance of the media—at the peak 
period of their alleged “independence” and “adversarial stance”—goes 
well beyond the predictions of the propaganda model, exceeding the 
expected norm of obedience to the state authorities and reaching the 
level that one finds in totalitarian states* As before, the servility of the 
media made a significant contribution to ensuring that the slaughter in 
Indochina would continue and that the U.S. government would be able 
to exploit its “Vietnam experience,” as filtered through the media, for 
later exercises in international terrorism. The remarkable performance 
of the media also laid the basis for the postwar interpretation of “what 
the war was all about” and why the United States failed to attain its 
ends, a matter to which we turn in the next section. 


5*6. THE VIETNAM WAR IN 
RETROSPECT 

In April 1975, the war came to an end, and the thirty-year conflict 
entered a new phase. Indochina faced the near-insoluble problems of 
reconstruction in a land that had been reduced to ruin by foreign armies 
after a century of colonial oppression. In the United States too, elite 
groups faced a problem of reconstruction* but of a different kind. The 
problem in the United States was the reconstruction of ideology, the 
taming of the domestic population that had lost its faith in the nobility 
of intent and the inspiring benevolence of the elites who determine U.S* 
policy. It was necessary to overcome what Norman Podhoretz, echoing 
Goebbels, calls “the sickly inhibitions against the use of military force,” 



THE rNDOCHfNA WARS (r): VTETftAM 237 


the dread “Vietnam syndrome*” finally cured by the stirring triumph 
of U,S. arms in Grenada* so Podhoretz hoped, 1,2 This was part of a 
larger problem, the “crisis of democracy” perceived by Western elites 
as the normally passive general population threatened to participate in 
the political system, challenging established privilege and power, 153 A 
further task was to prevent recovery in the societies ravaged by the 
American assault, so that the partial victory already achieved by their 
destruction could be sustained. 

As we have seen, through the mid-sixties* the media loyally fulfilled 
their function of service to state violence, and there was no significant 
popular opposition to the U.S. attack on Indochina. True, in 1964* the 
population voted 2 to 1 in favor of the “peace candidate,” who was 
assuring them that we want no wider war while laying the groundwork 
for the rapid escalation planned for the postelection period* a note¬ 
worthy illustration of the character of electoral politics in a society 
lacking genuine opposition parties and a critical and independent press. 
Nevertheless* the enthusiasm of the ideological institutions for the 
rapid escalation of U.S, efforts to “defend South Vietnam” from “inter¬ 
nal aggression” helped keep the public in line as the U.S. invading army 
rose to over half-a-million men on the ground and appeared to be 
attaining some success in “grinding the enemy down by sheer weight 
and mass*” although at “horrendous cost,” in the words of pacification 
chief Robert (“Blowtorch”) Komer, later to become a high-ranking 
official of the Human Rights Administration. 154 

By 1967, the popular mood was shifting, and the public was begin¬ 
ning to defy the hawk-dove consensus of elites for whom the issues 
were limited to tactics and expedience, a matter of much government 
concern. Defense Secretary McNamara warned the president* in secret, 
in May 1967 that expansion of the American war might “polarize opin¬ 
ion to the extent that *doves J in the US will get out of hand—massive 
refusals to serve, or to fight, or to cooperate* or worse?” 155 At the time 
of the Tet offensive, the Joint Chiefs of Staff were concerned with “our 
capacity to meet the possibility of widespread civil disorder in the 
months ahead”; in considering further troop deployments, they took 
care to ensure that “sufficient forces are still available for civil disorder 
control*” including “National Guard forces deployed under State or 
Federal control” and U.S. Army troops. The Pentagon warned further 
that a request for more troops might lead to “increased defiance of the 
draft and growing unrest in the cities,” running the risk of “provoking 
