shown, in anticipation of negative corporate reaction, station officials 
“did all we could to get the program sanitized” {according to one station 
source), 53 The chief executive of Gulf + Western complained to the 
station that the program was “virulently anti-business if not anti- 
American,” and that the station's carrying the program was not the 
behavior “of a friend” of the corporation. The London Economist says 
that “Most people believe that WNET would not make the same mis¬ 
take again,” 54 

In addition to discrimination against unfriendly media institutions, 
advertisers also choose selectively among programs on the basis of their 
own principles. With rare exceptions these are culturally and politically 
conservative, 55 Large corporate advertisers on television will rarely 
sponsor programs that engage in serious criticisms of corporate activi¬ 
ties, such as the problem of environmental degradation, the workings 
of the military-industrial complex, or corporate support of and benefits 
from Third World tyrannies* Erik Bamouw recounts the history of a 
proposed documentary series on environmental problems by NBC at a 
time of great interest in these issues. Barnouw notes that although at 
that time a great many large companies were spending money on com¬ 
mercials and other publicity regarding environmental problems, the 
documentary series failed for want of sponsors. The problem was one 
of excessive objectivity in the series, which included suggestions of 
corporate or systemic failure, whereas the corporate message “was one 
of reassurance,” 56 

Television networks learn over time that such programs will not sell 
and would have to be carried at a financial sacrifice, and that, in 
addition, they may offend powerful advertisers. 57 With the rise in the 
price of advertising spots, the forgone revenue increases; and with 
increasing market pressure for financial performance and the diminish¬ 
ing constraints from regulation, an advertising-based media system will 
gradually increase advertising time and marginalize or eliminate alto¬ 
gether programming that has significant public-affairs content. 58 

Advertisers will want, more generally, to avoid programs with serious 
complexities and disturbing controversies that interfere with the “buy¬ 
ing mood.” They seek programs that will lightly entertain and thus fit 
in with the spirit of the primary purpose of program purchases—the 



iS MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


dissemination of a selling message. Thus over time, instead of programs 
like “The Selling of the Pentagon,” it is a natural evolution of a market 
seeking sponsor dollars to offer programs such as “A Bird's-Eye View 
of Scotland/' “Barry Goldwater's Arizona,” “An Essay on Hotels/ 3 and 
“Mr. Rooney Goes to Dinner”—a CBS program on “how Americans 
eat when they dine out, where they go and why.” 5 * There are excep¬ 
tional cases of companies willing to sponsor serious programs, some¬ 
times a result of recent embarrassments that call for a public-relations 
offset. 60 But even in these cases the companies will usually not want to 
sponsor close examination of sensitive and divisive issues—they prefer 
programs on Greek antiquities, the ballet, and items of cultural and 
national history and nostalgia. Bamouw points out an interesting con¬ 
trast: commercial-television drama “deals almost wholly with the here 
and now, as processed via advertising budgets,” but on public televi¬ 
sion, culture “has come to mean ‘other cultures/ .., American civiliza¬ 
tion, here and now, is excluded from consideration/ 361 

Television stations and networks are also concerned to maintain 
audience “flow” levels, i.e., to keep people watching from program to 
program, in order to sustain advertising ratings and revenue. Airing 
program interludes of documentary-cultural matter that cause station 
switching is costly, and over time a “free 51 (i.e., ad-based) commercial 
system will tend to excise it. Such documentary-cultural-critical 
materials will be driven out of secondary media vehicles as well, as these 
companies strive to qualify for advertiser interest, although there will 
always be some cultural-political programming trying to come into 
being or surviving on the periphery of the mainstream media. 


1.3. SOURCING MASS-MEDIA 
NEWS: THE THIRD FILTER 

The mass media are drawn into a symbiotic relationship with powerful 
sources of information by economic necessity and reciprocity of inter¬ 
est. The media need a steady, reliable flow of the raw material of news. 
They have daily news demands and imperative news schedules that 
they must meet. They cannot afford to have reporters and cameras at 
all places where important stories may break. Economics dictates that 
they concentrate their resources where significant news often occurs, 
where important rumors and leaks abound, and where regular press 







A propaganda model r§ 


conferences are held. The White House, the Pentagon* and the State 
Department* in Washington, D.C., are central nodes of such news 
activity. On a local basis* city hall and the police department are the 
subject of regular news “beats” for reporters. Business corporations and 
trade groups are also regular and credible purveyors of stories deemed 
