220 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


gloomy despair and convinced U.S. elites that there was no realistic 
hope of a military victory in Vietnam at a cost acceptable to the United 
States, but also changed the character of media reporting and commen¬ 
tary, which mirrored the changes in elite opinion. On the ground, 
American correspondents were able to witness the war at first hand, 
gaining a view rather different from the sanitized and edited version 
presented under the control of the American military command. Media 
commentary at home reflected elite opinion in recognizing that the 
optimistic forecasts that had been relayed from Washington with little 
skepticism were inaccurate, and that a long and bitter war lay ahead. 
But on-the-scene reporting and domestic commentary never veered 
from the framework of the state propaganda system. In reporting the 
fighting in Ben Tre and My Tho in the Delta, for example, the press 
observed that American infantry participated while the towns were 
blasted by American bombers, helicopter gunships, navy patrol boats, 
and artillery to root out the Viet Cong—that is, the South Vietnamese 
guerrillas who “were probably living with the people,*’ according to an 
American officer quoted by Bernard Weinraub. Nonetheless, the news 
reports speak of the perceived need to “blast the city" with jets and 
helicopter gunships, particularly the poorer and most crowded sections, 
“to save other sections of the city and the lives of thousands of peo¬ 
ple ..(Lee Lescaze)—people whose lives were threatened not by the 
southern NLF guerrillas living among them but by the U.S. forces 
“defending" them from the NLF. Because of Tet, Weinraub explains, 
“the protection of Ben Tre was limited," and it was necessary to bring 
in troops from the U.S. Ninth Infantry Division by helicopter, and to 
carry out “bombing raids and fire by helicopter gunships and artillery" 
to “protect" Ben Tre, which “has long been a stronghold of the Viet¬ 
cong” and is “sometimes considered a Vietcong rest and recreation 
area," while surrounding hamlets “thought to be controlled by the 
Vietcong have been razed by allied bombing and artillery attacks and 
fire from armed helicopters." In Ben Tre itself, “the market place is 
rubble and near the gutted homes nearby women in shawls sit in the 
noon heat and mourn with loud groans," while “My Tho still smells of 
death,” with half the homes destroyed—thanks ro the effective “protec¬ 
tion" the population received from their American defenders, 122 
Throughout, it is taken for granted that the forces armed, trained, 
and supplied by the only foreign element in the delta are “the South 
Vietnamese," not the South Vietnamese guerrillas living among the 
population in their “Vietcong strongholds," from whom the United 
States is “protecting” the population by ferocious bombardment of 
civilian areas. 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (l); VIETNAM 221 


Recall that we are now evaluating the remaining component of the 
Freedom House thesis: that the media were suppressing the American 
victory in their antiestablishment zeal. In fact* they were reporting the 
story accurately in a narrow sense* but completely within the frame¬ 
work of the government propaganda system—never questioned, in a 
shameful display of media servility. We may imagine what the reaction 
would be to a comparable performance on the part of the Nazi or Soviet 
press, Braestrup’s final comment that “a free society deserves better” 
of its media (I, 728) is accurate enough* although not quite in the sense 
intended in the Freedom House study. 

As throughout the war* the standpoint of the media continued to 
reflect the perceptions and attitudes of the American military; for ex¬ 
ample* an American official who observed: “What the Vietcong did was 
occupy the hamlets we pacified just for the purpose of having the allies 
move in and bomb them. By their presence* the hamlets were de¬ 
stroyed,” 133 The same New York Times report from Binh Dinh Prov¬ 
ince—the “showcase” province for pacification—indicates this had 
been going on* unreported* well before the Tet offensive: “The enemy 
moves in December—which several military men called a 'softening up* 
for the offensive—resulted in a wave of allied air strikes on villages. 
Hundreds of homes were destroyed.” 

The U,S. military “resistance”—to borrow the Freedom House ter¬ 
minology—took the same form elsewhere. Robert Shaplen reported 
from the scene that in Saigon* 

A dozen separate areas, comprising perhaps sixty or seventy 
blocks* had been totally burned out. These were almost all resi¬ 
dential areas. , , , Most of the damage was the result of rocket 
attacks by American armed helicopters or other planes, though 
some of it had been caused by artillery or ground fighting. ... A 
modem ten-million-dollar textile plant* containing forty thousand 
spindles* was entirely destroyed by bombs because it was sus¬ 
pected of being a Vietcong hideout. 124 

Le Monde correspondent Jean-Claude Pomonti observed that 

in the popular suburbs, the Front [NLF] has proven that the only 
way to eliminate its control is through systematic destruction. To 
dislodge it* the air force had to level many residential areas. Flee¬ 
ing the bombardments* tens of thousands of refugees have poured 
into the center of the city. 125 



222 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


