and other informed sources at the time. 

To be clear, in our one article, to which Ponchaud alludes, we did 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (l I): LAOS AND CAMBODIA 29I 


express some “skepticism*” not only about claims that had already been 
withdrawn as fabrications but also about others that remained to be 
assessed* Thus in reviewing Ponchaud, we expressed skepticism about 
his estimate of casualties caused by American bombing* which appeared 
to us excessive and possibly based on misinterpretation of figures he 
cited; and we raised questions about some of the quotes attributed to 
the Khmer Rouge on which he (and later others) crucially relied, but 
which he had presented in very different forms on different occasions— 
and which he later conceded to have no basis whatsoever. 105 It is 
noteworthy that our skepticism about charges against the United 
States, although based merely on suspicion* has elicited no comment , 
while our skepticism about charges against the Khmer Rouge* which 
was based on textual evidence and* as it later turned out, was much 
understated* has aroused great fury in what Vickery describes as “in¬ 
competent* even dishonest” and “often scurrilous” commentary. 106 
The differential reaction is easily explained. It is taken for granted that 
U.S. actions must be recounted with scrupulous care and in nuanced 
manner* so our insistence on this is simply what is to be expected, 
meriting no comment. {We agree.) In contrast, the acts of official ene¬ 
mies merit no such scruples* and it is an unforgivable crime to question 
propaganda exercises undertaken in the service of power. 

Notice that even had the “skepticism” of “the Western left” to which 
Shawcross alludes existed to any significant degree, the idea that this 
could have the consequences he describes, coming from people sys¬ 
tematically barred from the media and mainstream discussion* is a 
construction of such audacity that one must admire its creator. Shaw¬ 
cross argues further that this alleged “left-wing skepticism” not only 
silenced Western media and governments but also prevented any mean¬ 
ingful Western response to Khmer Rouge atrocities. This thesis is too 
ludicrous to merit comment* and we can assess Shawcross’s seriousness 
in advancing it by turning to his own proposals at the time as to what 
could be done* recalling that he had easy access to the mainstream 
media throughout. We find not a word suggesting what might be 
done 107 —for the simple reason that neither he nor anyone else could 
think of anything useful. The situation was, of course, quite different 
during phase I of the genocide* or with regard to Timor during phase 
II and since, and in innumerable other cases where Sh aweross's charge 
would indeed be valid* We learn a good deal about “holocaust and the 
modem conscience” by observing this exercise and the reaction it 
elicited* 
