the reader of his columns might have learned about life in the Cambo¬ 
dian countryside from his reporting during the peak period of the 
bombing. 71 

Others too stress that “memory is the answer.” Commenting on the 
award-winning film The Killing Fields, Samuel Freedman writes that 
“While Holocaust survivors have helped perpetuate the memory of 
Nazi infamy, the Cambodian genocide is already being forgotten,” 



28 o manufacturing consent 


referring to phase II of the genocide* phase I having passed into obliv¬ 
ion with no concern. 72 The New York Times reminds ns that “Cambodia 
remains perhaps the most pitiful victim of the Indochina wars*” as it 
is caught between the forces of Pol Pot and Hanoi, which used Pol Pot 
attacks against Vietnamese villages as “a long-sought pretext to invade” 
and now exploits “Pol Pops Khmer Rouge army of 30*000 inside Cam¬ 
bodia” (in fact, mostly inside Thailand) as “the pretext for remaining 
in Cambodia.” “Unimaginable slaughter* invasion* brutal occupation 
have followed famine and pestilence,” all attributable to the Commu¬ 
nists* although the suffering has been “aggravated by the cynicism of 
big powers,” not further differentiated. As for the United States* 
“When Vietcong guerrillas used a neutral Cambodia as a sanctuary, it 
was pounded by American bombs and drawn into a war it hoped to 
avoid*” but that is all. In a later comment, the editors concede that 
“murderous aerial bombing followed by brutal revolution, famine and 
civil war” brought Cambodia to ruin* but of all of this* “what cannot 
be sponged away are the Khmer Rouge's butcheries” and the actions 
of Hanoi* which has “subjugated and impoverished” Cambodia: phases 
II and III of “the decade of the genocide.” 73 

“Memory is the answer*” but only when focused on proper targets* 
far from home. 


6,2*6. The Pol Pot era 

Phase II of “the decade of the genocide” began with the Khmer Rouge 
takeover in April 1975. Within a few weeks* the Khmer Rouge were 
accused in the national press of “barbarous cruelty” and “genocidal 
policies” comparable to the “Soviet extermination of the Kulaks or 
with the Gulag Archipelago.” 74 This was at a time when the death toll 
was perhaps in the thousands; the half million or more killed during 
phase I of the genocide never merited such comment, nor were these 
assessments of the first days of phase II (or later ones* quite generally) 
accompanied by reflection on the consequences of the American war 
that were anticipated by U.S. officials and relief workers on the scene* 
