
that this charging of the Soviet bloc with the assassination attempt is 
a painful embarrassment to Western governments (parroting the SHK 
line on this point). Newsweek nowhere discusses the seventeen-month 
lag in Agca’s confession or his prison conditions, nor does it report in 
this (or any later) article the claims and information noted in the 
London Sunday Times and the Italian press about inducements or 
coercive threats that might have been applied to Agca while in custody. 

Agca J s evidence is given credibility by Newsweek through several 
devices: repeating his claims several times as the core of the story; 
stressing in two separate sequences investigative judge Martella J s al¬ 
leged honesty, integrity, conscientiousness, etc.; quoting from Italian 
officials who say they “have the evidence” that “Agca operated in close 
contact with the Bulgarians”; asserting that “all the evidence suggests” 
that Agca is “not crazy.” But most important is the previously men¬ 
tioned refusal to discuss the premises of the SHK framework or to use 
an alternative frame. 

Newsweek swallows intact a series of SHK ideological assumptions, 
such as that “investigators [read “Paul Henze”] now think” Agca was 
probably using the Gray Wolves as a cover; Bulgaria and the Soviet 
Union have long been trying “to destabilize Turkey through terrorism” 
(quoting Henze directly); in Sofia, Agca’s presence “must have come 
to the attention of the Bulgarian secret police” (duplicating the fre¬ 
quent SHK error of forgetting their claim that Agca had already been 
recruited for the papal assassination attempt in Turkey, as well as 
erroneously assuming that the Bulgarian secret police can easily iden¬ 
tify Turks passing through their country). Newsweek states as estab¬ 
lished fact that “Agca had help from a huge set of Bulgarians,” although 
it provides no evidence for this except assertions by Agca, Italian 
officials, and Paul Henze. It reports Agca’s numerous transactions with 
Bulgarians in Rome without mentioning the problem of plausible deni- 
ability and without batting an eyelash at the sheer foolishness of the 
scenario. This Newsweek article is nonetheless powerful, with its reiter¬ 
ation of many details, its confidently asserted plots and subplots, its 
quotes from many authorities supporting the charges, and its seeming 
openness and occasional mention of lack of full proof—but it is a piece 
of uncritical propaganda that confines itself strictly within the SHK 
frame, with the exception of the single phrase cited earlier. 

Initially, the other major media performed quite uniformly in the 
same mold—uncritical, trivial, working solely within the bounds of the 
SHK model, and entirely bypassing all the hard but obvious questions 
raised by the “alternative” model. Of the thirty-two news articles on, 
or closely related to, the plot that appeared in the New York Times 



THE KGB-BULGARIAN PLOT TO KILL THE POPE 


between November i, 1982* and January 31* 1983, twelve had no news 
content whatever but were reports of somebody's opinion or specula¬ 
tion about the case—or refusal to speculate about the issue* (The Times 
carried one news article whose sole content was that President Reagan 
had “no comment 51 on the case.) More typical was the front-page article 
by Henry Kamm, “Bonn is Fearful of Bulgaria Tie with Terrorists” 
(Dec, 12* 1982)* or Bernard Gwertzman's “U.S, Intrigued But Uncertain 
on a Bulgarian Tie” (Dec. 26,1982). In “news report” after news report* 
unnamed individuals are “intrigued*” their interest is “piqued*” evi¬ 
dence is said to be “not wholly convincing*” or “final proof is still 
lacking,” Four of the news articles in the Times were on peripheral 
subjects such as smuggling in Bulgaria or papal-Soviet relations. Of the 
sixteen more direct news items* only one covered a solid news fact— 
namely, Antonov's arrest in Rome. The other fifteen news items were 
trivia* such as Kamm’s “Bulgarians Regret Tarnished Image” (Jan. 27* 
1983)* or another Kamm piece entitled “Italian Judge Inspects Apart¬ 
ment of Suspect in Bulgarian Case 55 (Jan. 12* 1983), All of these expres¬ 
sions of opinion* doubts* interest* suppositions, and minor detail served 
to produce a lot of smoke—which kept the issue of possible Soviet 
involvement before the public. They steered quite clear of substantive 
issues that bore on motives* quality of evidence* and Turkish and Italian 
context. 

During the years that followed* to the end of the trial in March 1986* 
the mass media, with only minor exceptions, adhered closely and un¬ 
critically to the SHK framework. 26 They not only failed to press alter¬ 
native questions* they also refused to examine closely the premises, 
logic* or evidence supporting the SHK case. Part of the reason for this 
was the media's extraordinary reliance on Sterling and Henze as 
sources (and Kalb's position as a news reporter on NBC-TV), and their 
unwillingness to ask these sources probing questions. 


4.5. BIASED SOURCING 

Sterling and Henze, and to a lesser extent Michael Ledeen, dominated 
perceptions of the Bulgarian Connection in the U.S. mass media to a 
remarkable degree. Moreover, they affected the course of events in 
Italy, as their version of Bulgarian guilt was aired in the Italian media 
before Agca named the Bulgarians and may have influenced Martella 
as well, 27 Sterling and Henze dominated media coverage by virtue of 
the very wide distribution of their articles and books on the case* and 



158 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


