most widely used participant on radio and television talk shows on terrorism 
in the last several years. 

95. On Sterling’s qualifications as an expert, see Herman and Brodhead, Bul¬ 
garian Connection, pp. 125-46; on Shevchenko, see Edward J. Epstein, “The 
Invention of Arkady Shevchenko, Supermole: The Spy Who Came In to Be 
Sold,” New Republic, July 15-22, 1985. 

96. See David Caute, The Great Fear: The Anti-Communist Purge under Tru¬ 
man and Eisenhower (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1978)5 PP* 114-38, who 
stresses the importance of the lying informer. This McCarthyite pathology was 
replicated in Robert Leiken’s 1982 book on “Soviet hegemonism” the stan¬ 
dard Maoist phrase—which conjures up a Soviet strategy of taking over the 
Western Hemisphere by means of Cuba and the Sandinistas, and guerrilla 
movements elsewhere (Leiken, Soviet Strategy in Latin America [New York. 

Praeger, 1982]). ,. 

97. Then and now, former dissidents are portrayed as especially valuable 
experts for the seeming authenticity they can bring to the mistakes of their 


former associates. The fact that their claims are often fraudulent is not a 
problem because the mass media refuse to point this out. Thus Jean Lacouture 
lent credence to his criticisms of the Khmer Rouge by claiming to have been 
a former sympathizer—not only a falsehood, as he was pro-Sihanouk, but an 
absurdity, as nothing had been known about the Khmer Rouge. David Horo¬ 
witz added to his value as a born-again patriot by claiming that along with 
protesters against the Vietnam War generally, he came “to acquire a new 
appreciation for foreign tyrants like Kim II Sung of North Korea” (Peter 
Collier and David Horowitz, “Confessions of Two New-Left Radicals: Why 
We Voted for Reagan,” Washington Post National Weekly Edition, April 8, 
1985). Robert Leiken became more potent as a critic of the Sandinistas as an 
alleged former peace-movement activist and early supporter of the Sandinis¬ 
tas. Each of these claims was a fabrication, but this fact went unmentioned in 
the mass media. On Leiken’s claims, and the “special force” his anti-Sandinista 
writings gained by his alleged conversion from “fan of the Sandinistas,” see 
Michael Massing, “Contra Aides,” Mother Jones (October 1987). While dis¬ 
missing this pretense, Massing credits Leiken’s claim that he “was active in the 
antiwar movement,” but that is highly misleading. Activists in the Boston area, 
where he claims to have been an antiwar organizer, recall no participation by 
Leiken until about 1970—at which time McGeorge Bundy could also have 
been described as an activist leader. 

98. See above, note 55. 

99. See “The Business Campaign Against Trial by TV,’ ” Business Week, June 
22,1980, pp. 77-79; William H. Miller, “Fighting TV Hatchet Jobs,” Industry 
Week, January 12, 1981, pp. 61-64. 

