South Vietnamese people also "allowed themselves to be lulled into a 
complacent sense of dependency on the United States,” thinking we 
wouldn't back down, not realizing that small clients are expendable. 
The South Vietnamese people who fought the U.S. invasion are never 
mentioned, or considered to be "South Vietnamese” within Kamow's 
patriotic frame, although they constituted the majority of the popula¬ 
tion and the only serious political force, according to U.S. specialists 
and officials on the scene, and despite the fact that the U.S.-selected 
faction repeatedly stressed that "Frankly, we are not strong enough 
now to compete with the communists on a purely political basis.” 40 A 
Soviet Kamow would no doubt express similar concern in retrospect 
that the Soviet Union allowed the "Afghans” to rely too heavily on 
Soviet power. 

By the standards we rightly apply to the actions of the Soviet Union 
or other official enemies, there is nothing further that need be said 
about the media and Indochina. Any further discussion is on a par with 
the minor question of whether Pravda reports facts accurately about 
“the Soviet defense of Afghanistan.” Adopting the Freedom House— 
Trilateral Commission perspective, a Communist party functionary 
might criticize Pravda for excessive pessimism or for too adversarial a 
stance, contributing to the eventual loss of the war and the takeover of 
Afghanistan by feudalist elements committed to terrorism, horrifying 
repression of women, religious fanaticism, plans to “march on Jerusa¬ 
lem,” etc. Or if he found that the reporting was sufficiently upbeat and 
not too distorted, he might laud Pravda for its accuracy and objectivity. 
But all of this would be nonsense, whatever is discovered; serious 
evaluation of the media is effectively over when we discover that the 
basic principle of state propaganda—the principle that the USSR is 
defending Afghanistan from terrorist attack—is adopted as the unques¬ 
tioned framework for further reporting and discussion. The same is true 
in the case of U.S. aggression in Indochina. 

We cannot quite say that the propaganda model is verified in the case 
of the Indochina wars, since it fails to predict such extraordinary, 



l86 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


far-reaching, and exceptionless subservience to the state propaganda 
system. The fact that this judgment is correct—as it plainly is—is 
startling enough. Even more revealing with regard to Western intellec¬ 
tual culture is that the simple facts cannot be perceived, and their 
import lies far beyond the bounds of the thinkable* 

Nevertheless, let us pursue the narrow question of media coverage 
of Indochina, bearing in mind that we are now turning to relatively 
minor matters, having taken note of a central and quite devastating 
