is supported by queries made by independent observers on rhe reasons 
why Salvadorans voted. 61 

In Guatemala, as in El Salvador, voting was required by law; nonvot¬ 
ers were subject to a fine of five quetzales ($1.25). Also, as in El Salvador, 
newspaper ads sponsored by the army asserted that it was treasonous 
to fail to vote or to vote null or blank. 62 The law group reported that 
“many” people expressed fears that nonvoting would subject them to 
reprisals, and after the military threats in the week before the election 
there was “a widespread belief that failure to vote would be punishable 
by more than the fivt-quetzal fine stipulated by law.” 63 

In Nicaragua, while registration was obligatory, voting was not re¬ 
quired by law. Voter-registration cards presented on election day were 
retained by election officials, so that the failure to vote as evidenced by 
the lack of a validated voter credential could not be used as the basis 
of reprisals. 64 Most of the voters appeared to LASA observers to be 
voting under no coercive threat—they did not have to vote by Jaw; they 
were urged to vote but not threatened with the designation of “traitors” 
for not voting; there were no obvious means of identifying nonvoters; 
and the government did not kill dissidents, in contrast to the normal 
practice in El Salvador and Guatemala. 

In sum, Nicaragua did not have a potent coercion package at work 
to help get out the vote—as did the Salvadoran and Guatemalan gov¬ 
ernments. 


3.4. EL SALVADOR: HOW THE 
U.S. MEDIA TRANSFORMED A 
“DERANGED KILLING 
MACHINE” INTO THE 
PROTECTOR OF AN INCIPIENT 
DEMOCRACY 


In reporting on the 1982 Salvadoran election, the U.S. mass media 
closely followed the government agenda. The personalities of the can¬ 
didates, the long lines waiting to vote, alleged rebel disruption, and 



ro8 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


turnout” were heavily featured, 65 As Jack Spence pointed out* “every 
media outlet* particularly the networks* cast the election-day story in 
a framework of voting in the midst of extensive guerrilla violence at 
polling places,” 66 Warren Hoge and Richard Meislin, of the New York 
Times , repeated day after day that the rebels were threatening disrup¬ 
