
policy of “Vietnamization,” large-scale massacre operations to destroy 
the indigenous resistance and its civilian base, expansion of the war in 
Laos and Cambodia* and the commencement of negotiations with 
North Vietnam, “Accordingly* the networks again changed the focus of 
their coverage, this time from the battlefields in Vietnam to the negotia¬ 
tion tables in Paris, . . . The "story 5 was now the negotiations, not the 
fighting,” Northshield explained, adding that “combat stories seemed 
like a contradiction and would confuse the audience,” “ Similar deci¬ 
sions were made at the other networks,” Epstein adds, as all “altered 
their coverage in late 1969 from combat pieces to stories about the 
"Vietnamization J of the war” and the negotiations in Paris. The post- 
Tet accelerated pacification campaign* one of the most crucial and 
murderous operations in the U.S. war against South Vietnam, received 
little attention, 

Epstein believes that “there is a marked difference between the 
coverage of the formative years of the war {1962-1967) and the later 
years (when the antiwar movement was at its height).” “Up until 1968, 
television coverage was controlled to a large extent by the American 
military, and generally it reflected a controlled American initiative 
which seemed to be winning the countryside and decimating the Viet- 
cong. The searchlight rarely focused on related questions, such as the 
sufferings of Vietnamese civilians.” During the Tet offensive, the focus 
changed to Americans “shown on the defensive, endangered and help¬ 
lessly frustrated,” then to “the story of the American withdrawal” as 
""negotiations began at the end of 1968.” The differences, however, are 
misleading. Apart from the live coverage during the Tet offensive, there 
is very little departure from the principle that the war must be viewed 
from the standpoint determined by official Washington doctrine—a 
standpoint that broadened in scope after Tet, as tactical disagreements 
arose within elite circles. 

In his survey of network newscasts from 1965 through the January 
1973 peace treaty, Daniel Hallin reaches similar conclusions. Until the 
Tet offensive, television coverage was “lopsidedly favorable to Ameri¬ 
can policy in Vietnam,” well beyond even the ""remarkably docile” print 
media. Like Epstein, he notes the “dramatic” change after Tet, “part 
of a larger change, a response to as well as a cause of the unhappiness 
with the war that was developing at many levels, from the halls of the 
Pentagon, to Main Street, U.S.A. and the fire bases of Quang Tri 
province 55 —and, much more crucially, the unhappiness that had be¬ 
come quite significant by 1968 among business elites, leading to the 
changes in U.S. government policy already discussed. ‘"Before Tet, 
editorial comments by television journalists £an nearly four to one in 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (i): VIETNAM 203 


favor of administration policy; after Tet, two to one against/ 5 reflecting 
divisions in the “establishment itself,’’ He quotes New York Times 
editor Max Frankel, who said in an interview that “we’re an establish¬ 
ment institution, and whenever your natural constituency changes, then 
naturally you will too.” The same was true of television, and it is hardly 
surprising—and quite in accord with the propaganda model—that its 
fervent loyalty to the administration changed when “the establishment 
bastards have bailed out,” as Lyndon Johnson put it bitterly after the 
“Wise Men” advised him in March 1968 to abandon hope of military 
victory and to de-escalate the conflict, in the wake of the Tet offen¬ 
sive, 87 

Television typically presented events in terms of “a kind of morality 
play,.., a dramatic contrast between good, represented by the Ameri¬ 
can peace offensive [in 1966], and evil, represented by Hanoi,” Report¬ 
ing was relatively bloodless, focusing on the successes of “the 'good 
guys’: American boys in action,” regularly depicted as “brave men,” 
“the greatest men in the world,” “heroes,” exuding competence, hu¬ 
manity, and high morale as they fight against “Communist aggression” 
in the “battle for democracy,” and “win hearts and minds” by caring 
for sick and injured civilians after a village “was burned and blasted to 
death”—properly, because ammunition had been found there, which 
“was enough proof of its being used by the Vietcong” (Greg Harris, 
NBC-TV, Oct, 27, 1967), The issue of racism “was apparently too 
sensitive to touch,” Hallin adds, noting that he found no “comment on 
the hostility that many American soldiers felt towards all Vietnamese, 
, . . a prominent theme in veterans’ recollections of the war.” 

The focus of coverage was the Americans: soldiers bravely defending 
Vietnam, medics caring for the wounded, pacification officials rebuild¬ 
ing after the damage for which Communist terror bore responsibility. 
“Our South Vietnamese” were virtually ignored, with virtually nothing 
on political, economic, or social affairs, and “the peasant figured in the 
news mainly as a victim and prize of the conflict.” The political opposi¬ 
tion in Vietnam was portrayed with considerable hostility, “like the 
antiwar movement at home,” They were “forces of anarchy , , , on the 
march” (Walter Cronkite, CBS-TV, Mar, 31,1966), The utterly fraudu¬ 
lent elections were portrayed as a triumph as democracy, courageously 
carried out in defiance of the disruptive attacks of “Vietcong terror¬ 
ists.” 83 

Civilian casualties were downplayed, or regarded as unavoidable side 
consequences of “a job that had to be done,” raising no moral question. 
Observing an air strike on a village of “unabashed” Viet Cong support¬ 
ers after a column of American soldiers had drawn fire, NBC’s Jack 



204 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 
