“they had got away with so much in Italy”). 44 As in the Third World 
election cases described in chapter 3, the media prefer to focus on 
superficial detail about the participants and opinions within a narrow 
range of establishment views (plus bluff denials by Bulgarian and Soviet 
officials), along with each development supporting the accepted case (a 
defector’s accusations, a further Agca confession, an investigator’s or 
prosecutor’s report, and leaks of alleged claims or expected new devel¬ 
opments), whatever its credibility, 

“Off the agenda” are arguments and facts that would call into ques¬ 
tion the validity of the basic SHK model, and those relating to the 
“alternative model” (which starts with the question of why Agca con¬ 
fessed so late and the likelihood that he was encouraged and pressed 
to talk). We will run through only a few of the important questions and 
points of evidence that the mass media put off the agenda. 

The basic SHK model rested its case on the Soviet motive, Agca’s 
stay in Sofia, and the high professionalism of the Soviet and Bulgarian 
secret police, which made it likely that they were manipulating Agca if 
he stopped off in Bulgaria. Only the ABC “20/20” program of May 12, 
1983, explored the Soviet motive in any depth, despite the constant 
mass-media reiteration of the SHK line. ABC went to the trouble of 
asking the Vatican about the validity of Marvin Kalb’s claim that the 
pope had written a note threatening to resign and to return to Poland 
to lead the resistance to any Soviet invasion. Cardinal John Krol, 
speaking for the Vatican, said that “Not only was there not such a letter, 
but such a letter directly from the Pope to Brezhnev would have been 
a total departure from all normal procedures. In no way could you 
conceive of the Holy Father saying, ‘I would resign. 1 ” ABC’s informa¬ 
tion from the Vatican too was that the pope’s spoken message to Brezh¬ 
nev was conciliatory. This spectacular repudiation of an important 
element in the SHK case was unreported in the rest of the media, and 
simply died with the ABC broadcast. And any balancing of supposed 
gains against the costs and risks to the Soviet Union in sponsoring Agca 
was simply not undertaken in the mass media. 

None of them stopped to evaluate Agca’s 1979 letter threatening to 
kill the pope on his earlier visit to Turkey. Sterling’s ludicrous claim 
that the KGB hired a Turk to kill the pope in order to damage Turkey’s 



THE KGB-BULGARIAN PLOT TO KILL THE POPE 163 


relation to NATO was never discussed* The question of the authentic¬ 
ity of Agca's letter to Turkes, which bears on Agca's political commit¬ 
ments (and thus another SHK premise), was never discussed in the U.S. 
mass media. During the trial, Abdullah Catli's statement that Bulgaria 
was a preferred Gray Wolves route to Europe because of the relative 
ease of hiding in the heavy Turkish traffic—which directly contradicts 
the SHK claim that the Bulgarian secret police know everything, and 
that Agca's stay in Sofia must therefore have been by Bulgarian official 
plan—was never picked up in the U.S. mass media's coverage of the 
Rome trial. 

The most striking deficiencies of the mass media's handling of the 
basic SHK claims, however, was their remarkable naivete in the face 
of the pseudoscientific speculations of SHK and the accumulating vio¬ 
lations of elementary principles of plausible deniability. The preposter¬ 
ous SHK claims—without a vestige of evidence—that Agca had been 
recruited by the KGB in Turkey for future work, and that he took on 
the appearance of a right-winger as a “cover," were not ridiculed, and 
were not evaluated when presented as purported truth. 45 There was 
never any discussion in the mass media of the fact that the thesis of 
prior recruitment and careful cultivation of Agca's cover in Turkey was 
flatly inconsistent with the claim that he was brought to Sofia for a 
lengthy stay for instructions. With regard to Agca's alleged open deal¬ 
ings with Bulgarians in Rome, the mass media simply refused to discuss 
the fact that the alleged professionalism and use of the right-wing Turk 
as a “cover” had disappeared. 

As regards the alternative model, and the likelihood that Agca had 
been encouraged and coached, here also the mass media refused to 
explore these dissonant possibilities. They simply would not examine 
and discuss the convenience of the newly discovered plot for so many 
Western interests; the huge time Jag in the naming of Bulgarians; Agca's 
prison conditions and prison contacts; reports of meetings, offers, and 
threats to Agca to induce him to talk; and the compromised character 
of the Italian police and intelligence agencies. This involved the media 
in the suppression of important documents. 

As one important instance, the July 12, 1984, Italian Report of the 
Parliamentary Commission on the Masonic Lodge P -2 describes in great 
detail the penetration of this massive neo-Fascist conspiracy into the 
military establishment, secret services, press, and judiciary, among oth¬ 
ers. This report was newsworthy in its own right, but it also had a 
bearing on the Bulgarian Connection case, as it addressed characteris¬ 
tics of Italian institutions that were directly involved in making and 



164 manufacturing consent 


prosecuting the case against the Bulgarians, The New York Times, Time , 
Newsweek, and CBS Evening News never mentioned the publication of 
this report. 

As a second major illustration, one year later, in July 1985, the Crimi¬ 
