enteen-month delay in the naming of Americans* and to the obvious 
possibility that Agca had been encouraged or coerced into revising his 
story. They would have focused intently on Agca’s prison conditions, 
his visitors there, his amenability to a “deal 15 with his captors, and any 
evidence in his statements or from other sources that he had been 
coached. The fact that Agca had visited the United States, among 
twelve countries, would not be considered strong evidence of CIA 
involvement, and the press might even have pointed out that a mini¬ 
mally competent CIA would not have brought Agca to Washington for 
instructions in the first place. 

The alternative model would take the same fact that SHK start out 
with—Agca’s stay in Sofia, Bulgaria—but interpret it differently. That 
visit violates principles of plausible deniability and would be especially 
foolish if the KGB had already recruited Agca in Turkey. On the other 
hand, it provides a Western propaganda system with the necessary tie 
between Agca’s terrorist attack m Rome and the Soviet bloc. The 
convenience of Agca’s confession—to Socialist leader Craxi, to the 
Christian Democrats and neo-Fascists in Italy, and to Reagan searching 
for a tie-in between “international terrorism” and the Soviet Union—is 
also crystal dear, and would immediately suggest to an objective press 
the possibility that this “demand” might have elicited an appropriate 
“supply” from the imprisoned Agca. The lag in Agca’s naming of any 
Bulgarians—seventeen months after he entered an Italian prison and 
seven months after he had agreed to “cooperate” with the investigating 
magistrate, Ilario Martella—is also highly suggestive. Why did it take 
him so long to name his co-conspirators? Sterling tried to explain this 
on the ground that Agca had hopes that the Bulgarians would “spring 
him” and gave them time; his successive elaborations of claims and 
subsequent retractions she explained in terms of Agca’s “signaling” to 
his alleged partners. This complex and speculative attempt to rational¬ 
ize inconvenient facts is not necessary; a very straightforward explana¬ 
tion based on Agca’s character and affiliations and the inducements 
known to have been offered to him (described below) does quite 
nicely. 15 Furthermore, Sterling’s explanation does not account for the 
fact that Agca failed to provide serious evidence late in the trial, long 
after it was clear that the Bulgarians had not responded to his alleged 
signals. 

Another suggestive feature of Agca’s confession is that it followed the 
creation and wide media distribution of the SHK model. During the 
course of the investigation of the plot, it was revealed that the impris¬ 
oned Agca had access to newspapers, radio, and television, among other 
modes of personal communication with the outside world. It was also 



l$2 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


