responsible for the capture and subsequent disappearance of our family 
members,” 104 They asked for an investigation, an accounting, and jus¬ 
tice, They appealed to the constituent assembly and began regular 
protests in downtown Guatemala City, banging pots and pans and, on 
occasion, peacefully occupying buildings. 

Nothing, of course, was done in response to the GAM demands. The 
assembly had no powers anyway, but was too fearful even to pass a 
resolution of support. The military rulers toyed with GAM, In public, 
with the press on hand, Mejia Victores would say, “I don't want to shirk 
responsibilities and something has to be done.” But when the press was 
not there, he said, “It seems as though you are accusing me—and we 
don't have them [the disappeared].” “You have them,” we said. “We 
don't have them,” he replied. 105 The military rulers were getting an¬ 
noyed, and phone threats, letters of warning, and open surveillance 
intensified. Two days after the exchange between Mejia Victores and 
GAM, the tortured bodies of two disappeared associated with GAM 
members showed up, one placed in front of his house with his eyes 
gouged out and his face barely recognizable. 

In a television interview on March 14,1985, Mejia Victores said that 
GAM was “being used by subversion, because if they have problems, 
solutions are being found, and they have been given every advantage 
to [solve these problems],” 106 A spate of newspaper headlines followed, 
stressing government warnings and allegations that GAM was being 
manipulated by subversives. In mid-March, General Mejia Victores 
was asked on television what action the government would take against 
GAM, He replied, “You'll know it when you see it*” 107 

On March 30, 1985, GAM leader Hector Gomez Calito was seized, 
tortured, and murdered, (The six policemen who had come for him 
were themselves assassinated shortly after his death.) 108 He had been 
burned with a blowtorch, on the stomach and elsewhere, and beaten on 
the face so severely that his lips were swollen and his teeth were broken; 
his tongue had been cut out. Then, on April 4, another leader of GAM, 
Maria Rosario Godoy de Cuevas, her twenty-one-year-old brother, and 
her two-year-old son were picked up, tortured, and murdered. Her 
breasts had bite marks and her underclothing was bloody; her two-year- 
old son had had his fingernails pulled out. 




WORTHY AND UNWORTHY VICTIMS S3 


On grounds of newsworthiness, the murders of the two GAM lead¬ 
ers, along with the brother and the child of one of them, would seem 
to deserve high-order attention. Their bravery was exceptional; the 
villainy they were opposing was extraordinary; the justice of their cause 
