specific purpose of producing flak. Another and older flak-producing 
machine with a broader design is Freedom House. The American Legal 
Foundation, organized in 1980, has specialized in Fairness Doctrine 
complaints and libel suits to aid “media victims.” The Capital Legal 
Foundation, incorporated in 1977, was the Scaife vehicle for Westmore¬ 
land's $i20-million libel suit against CBS. 100 

The Media Institute* organized in 1972 and funded by corporate- 
wealthy patrons, sponsors monitoring projects, conferences, and stud¬ 
ies of the media. It has focused less heavily on media failings in foreign 
policy, concentrating more on media portrayals of economic issues and 
the business community, but its range of interests is broad. The main 
theme of its sponsored studies and conferences has been the failure of 
the media to portray business accurately and to give adequate weight 
to the business point of view, 101 but it underwrites works such as John 
Corry J s expose of the alleged left-wing bias of the mass media. 102 The 
chairman of the board of trustees of the institute in 1985 was Steven V. 
Seekins* the top public-relations officer of the American Medical Asso¬ 
ciation; chairman of the National Advisory Council was Herbert 
Schmertz, of the Mobil Oil Corporation. 

The Center for Media and Public Affairs, run by Linda and Robert 
Lichter, came into existence in the mid-1980s as a “non-profit* non- 
partisan” research institute, with warm accolades from Patrick Bu¬ 
chanan* Faith Whittlesey* and Ronald Reagan himself, who recognized 
the need for an objective and fair press. Their Media Monitor and 
research studies continue their earlier efforts to demonstrate the liberal 
bias and anti-business propensities of the mass media. 103 

AIM was formed in 1969, and it grew spectacularly in the 1970s. Its 
annual income rose from $5,000 in 1971 to $1.5 million in the early 1980s, 
with funding mainly from large corporations and the wealthy heirs and 
foundations of the corporate system. At least eight separate oil compa¬ 
nies were contributors to AIM in the early 1980s, but the wide represen¬ 
tation in sponsors from the corporate community is impressive. 104 The 
function of AIM is to harass the media and put pressure on them to 
follow the corporate agenda and a hard-line* right-wing foreign policy. 
It presses the media to join more enthusiastically in Red-scare band¬ 
wagons, and attacks them for alleged deficiencies whenever they fail to 
toe the line on foreign policy. It conditions the media to expect trou- 



28 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


ble (and cost increases) for violating right-wing standards of bias. 105 

Freedom House, which dates back to the early 1940s, has had inter¬ 
locks with AIM, the World Anticommunist League, Resistance Inter¬ 
national, and U.S. government bodies such as Radio Free Europe and 
the CIA, and has long served as a virtual propaganda arm of the 
government and international right wing. It sent election monitors to 
the Rhodesian elections staged by Ian Smith in 1979 and found them 
“fair,” whereas the 1980 elections won by Mugabe under British super¬ 
vision it found dubious. Its election monitors also found the Salvadoran 
elections of 1982 admirable. 106 It has expended substantial resources in 
criticizing the media for insufficient sympathy with U.S. foreign-policy 
ventures and excessively harsh criticism of U.S. client states. Its most 
notable publication of this genre was Peter Braestrup's Big Storys which 
contended that the media's negative portrayal of the Tet offensive 
helped lose the war. The work is a travesty of scholarship, but more 
interesting is its premise: that the mass media not only should support 
any national venture abroad, but should do so with enthusiasm, such 
enterprises being by definition noble (see the extensive review of the 
Freedom House study in chapter 5 and appendix 3). In 1982, when the 
Reagan administration was having trouble containing media reporting 
of the systematic killing of civilians by the Salvadoran army. Freedom 
House came through with a denunciation of the “imbalance” in media 
reporting from El Salvador. 107 

Although the flak machines steadily attack the mass media, the media 
treat them well. They receive respectful attention, and their propagan- 
distic role and links to a larger corporate program are rarely mentioned 
or analyzed. AIM head, Reed Irvine's diatribes are frequently pub¬ 
lished, and right-wing network flacks who regularly assail the “liberal 
media,” such as Michael Ledeen, 108 are given Op-Ed column space, 
sympathetic reviewers, and a regular place on talk shows as experts. 
This reflects the power of the sponsors, including the well-entrenched 
position of the right wing in the mass media themselves. 109 

The producers of flak add to one another's strength and reinforce the 
command of political authority in its news-management activities. The 
government is a major producer of flak, regularly assailing, threatening, 
and “correcting” the media, trying to contain any deviations from the 
established line. News management itself is designed to produce flak. 
In the Reagan years, Mr. Reagan was put on television to exude charm 
to millions, many of whom berated the media when they dared to 
criticize the “Great Communicator,” 110 





A PROPAGANDA MODEL 29 


1.5. ANTICOMMUNISM AS A 
CONTROL MECHANISM 

