to come for Communist aggression in Vietnam*” while NBCs Jack 
Perkins* reporting an air-force attack that wiped out a “village una¬ 
bashedly advertising itself with signs and flags as a Vietcong village*” 
justified the attack as necessary: “The whole village had turned on the 
Americans, so the whole village was being destroyed.” It is taken for 
granted that the Americans had every right to be marauding in a region 
of Vietnam where “Everything in this area for years was Vietcong,” A 
television report on Operation Attleboro described the fighting as rag¬ 
ing “once again to preserve democracy.” 68 

Summarizing* from the late 1940s* the United States supported the 
French war of conquest; overturned the political settlement arranged 
at Geneva in 1954; established a terrorist client regime in the southern 
section of the country divided by foreign (i,e,, U.S.) force; moved on 
to open aggression against South Vietnam by 1962 and worked desper¬ 
ately to prevent the political settlement sought by Vietnamese on all 
sides; and then invaded outright in 1965* initiating an air and ground 
war that devastated Indochina. Throughout this period* the media 
presented the U.S, intervention entirely within the framework pre¬ 
dicted by a propaganda model. 

There are* of course* those who demand still higher standards of 
loyalty to the state* and for them* the fact that critical perceptions of 
American military officers in the field sometimes reached public atten¬ 
tion is an intolerable “adversarial stance” reflecting the left-wing pro¬ 
clivities of “the culture.” Putting this interesting perspective to the side* 
as far as this period is concerned we may dismiss the conception that 
the media “lost the war,” although it would be quite accurate to con¬ 
clude that they encouraged the United States to enter and pursue a war 
of aggression* which they later were to regard as “a tragedy,” or “a 
blunder*” while never acknowledging their fundamental contribution to 
rallying public support for the policies that they were ultimately to 
deplore. Given the conformism and obedience of the media during this 
crucial period* when the basis for U.S. aggression was firmly and irrevo¬ 
cably laid, it is small wonder that public concern was so slight* and that 
opposition was so negligible as to be entirely without significance. Only 
the most ardent researcher could have developed a moderately clear 
understanding of what was taking place in Indochina, 

Public attitudes after the bombing of North Vietnam in February 



THE INDOCHINA WARS (l)l VIETNAM I93 


1965* in “reprisal” for an attack on U.S. military installations by the 
“Viet Cong* 15 are therefore hardly surprising. Asked “Who do you think 
is behind the attacks by the Viet Cong?” 53 percent blamed the Chinese 
Communists and 26 percent blamed North Vietnam, while 7 percent 
said, “Civil war,” 69 In no identifiable sector of American opinion would 
it have been possible even to ask the obvious question that would 
receive an easy and accurate answer in the case of the Soviet invasion 
of Afghanistan: “Why do you think the southern resistance is attacking 
U.S. military installations in South Vietnam?” In fact* even at the peak 
of peace-movement activities—or today, many years later, when it 
should be possible to observe the plain facts with some detachment—it 
would be quite impossible to raise this simple and obvious question, or 
to answer it, within the mainstream media and most of “the culture.” 

In this dismal record we see very clearly the consequences of mind¬ 
less media obedience in a state with enormous resources of violence. 


5.4. REPORTING ON THE WAR 

As the U.S. invasion mounted in scale and intensity, Indochina was 
flooded with war correspondents, many of whom reported what they 
saw and heard with honesty and courage. With rare exceptions, how¬ 
ever, they gave an account of the war as perceived by the U.S. military 
on the ground or as offered in press briefings. In the home offices, 
Washington's version prevailed until elite divisions within the United 
States expanded the range of tactical debate. 

Reporters often did not conceal atrocities committed by the U.S, 
military forces, although they did not appear to perceive them as atroci¬ 
ties and surely did not express the horror and outrage that would have 
been manifest if others were the perpetrators, and the United States or 
its clients the victims. 70 Malcolm Browne quotes a U.S. official who 
describes B-52 strikes in the South as “the most lucrative raids made 
at any time during the war”: 

Every single bomb crater is surrounded with bodies, wrecked 
equipment and dazed and bleeding people. At one such hole there 
were 40 or 50 men, all in green North Vietnamese uniforms but 
without their weapons, lying around in an obvious state of shock. 
We sent in helicopter gunships, which quickly put them out of 
their misery. 71 



194 MANUFACTURING CONSENT 


The Geneva conventions require that “members of armed forces who 
have laid down their arms and those placed kors de combat by sickness, 
wounds, detention, or any other cause, shall in ail circumstances be 
treated humanely”; and there are no limits to the horror expressed, 
until today, over Communist treatment of U.S. pilots captured during 
the air operations that leveled much of North Vietnam. But the victims 
