by the concern to equilibrate liquids and solids. For if water has 


179 



powers of impregnation, which place it first among the 
humectants, it has, insofar as it can receive supplementary 
qualities like cold and heat, the virtues of constriction, of cooling 
or of heating, and it can even have those effects of consolidation 
attributed to substances like iron. In fact, the interplay of 
qualities is very labile, in the fluid substance of water; just as it 
penetrates easily into the web of all the tissues, it may be easily 
impregnated by all the qualitative influences to which it is 
subjected. Paradoxically, its universal use in the eighteenth 
century was not the result of a general recognition of its effect 
and mode of action, but of the ease with which the most 
contradictory forms and modalities could be attributed to its 
action. It is the locus of all possible therapeutic themes, forming 
an inexhaustible reservoir of operative metaphors. In this fluid 
element occurs the universal exchange of qualities. 

Of course, cold water cools. Otherwise would it be used in 
frenzy and mania—diseases of heat, in which the spirits boil, 
solids stretch, liquids seethe to the point of evaporation, leaving 
the brains of these sufferers “dry and fragile,” as anatomy can 
daily testify? Reasonably enough, Barthelemy-Camille Boissieu 
cites cold water among the essential means of cooling cures; as a 
bath, it comes first among the “antiphlogistics” which tear from 
the body the excessive igneous particles found there; as a drink, it 
is a “procrastinative dilution” which diminishes the resistance of 
fluids to the actions of solids, and thus indirectly lowers the 
general heat of the body. 

But it can just as well be said that cold water heats and hot 
water cools. It is precisely this thesis which Darut defends. Cold 
baths attack the blood that is at the periphery of the body and 
“drive it more vigorously toward the heart.” But the heart being 
the seat of natural heat, there the blood is heated, especially 
because “the heart, which struggles alone against the other parts, 
makes new efforts to drive out the blood and to overcome the 
resistance of the capillaries. Whence a great intensity of 


180 



circulation, the division of the blood, the fluidity of the humors, 
the destruction of the encumbrances, the augmentation of the 
forces of natural heat, of the appetite of the digestive forces, of 
the activity of the body and the mind.” The paradox of the hot 
bath is symmetrical: it draws the blood to the periphery, as well 
as the humors, perspiration, and all liquids, useful or harmful. 
Thus the vital centers are relieved; the heart now must function 
slowly; and the organism is thereby cooled. Is not this fact 
confirmed by “those syncopes, those lipothymias, that weakness, 
that lack of vigor” which accompany the too constant use of hot 
baths? 

Further still: so rich is water’s polyvalence, so great its aptitude 
for submitting to the qualities it bears, that it even manages to 
lose its efficacity as a liquid, and to act as a desiccant. Water can 
conjure away humidity. It revives the old principle “like to like,” 
but in another sense, and by the intermediary of an entire visible 
mechanism. For some, it is cold water that dries, heat on the 
contrary preserving water’s humidity. Heat, in fact, dilates the 
pores of the organism, distends its membranes, and permits 
humidity to impregnate them by a secondary effect. Heat clears 
the way for liquids. It is precisely for this reason that all the hot 
drinks the seventeenth century used and abused risk becoming 
harmful: relaxation, general humidity, softness of the entire 
organism—this is what threatens those who consume too many 
such infusions. And since these are the distinctive traits of the 
female body, as opposed to virile dryness and solidity, the abuse 
of hot drinks risks leading to a general feminization of the 
human race: “Most men are censured, not without reason, for 
having degenerated in contracting the softness, the habits, and 
the inclinations of women; there is lacking only a resemblance in 
bodily constitution. Excessive use of humectants immediately 
accelerates the metamorphosis and makes the two sexes almost as 
alike in the physical as in the moral realm. Woe to the human 
race, if this prejudice extends its reign to the common people; 


181 



there will be no more plowmen, artisans, soldiers, for they will 
soon be robbed of the strength and vigor necessary to their 
profession.” In cold water, it is the cold that vanquishes all the 
powers of humidity, for by tightening the tissues, it closes them 
to all possibility of impregnation: “Do we not see how much the 
vessels, the tissues of our flesh tighten when we wash in cold 
water or when we are numbed with cold?”6 Cold baths thus have 
the paradoxical property of consolidating the organism, of 
guaranteeing it against the softness of humidity, of “giving tone 
to the parts,” as Hoffmann said, “and augmenting the systaltic 
