

148 



damnati it must bear the faults of numerous other affections; if a 
disease of unknown nature and hidden origin appears in a 
woman in such a manner that its cause escapes us, and that the 
therapeutic course is uncertain, we immediately blame the bad 
influence of the uterus, which, for the most part, is not 
responsible; and when we are dealing with an inhabitual 
symptom, we declare that there is a trace of hysteria hidden 
beneath it all, and what has so often been the subterfuge of so 
much ignorance we take as the object of our treatment and our 
remedies.” With all due regard to the traditional commentators 
on this text, which is inevitably cited in any study on hysteria, it 
does not mean that Willis suspected the absence of an organic 
basis in symptoms of hysterical affection. He merely says, and in 
an explicit way, that the idea of hysteria is a catchall for the 
fantasies, not of the person who is or believes himself ill, but of 
the ignorant doctor who pretends to know why. Nor does the 
fact that hysteria is classified by Willis among diseases of the 
head indicate that he considered it a disorder of the mind; but 
only that he attributed its origin to a change in the nature, the 
origin, and the initial course of the animal spirits. 

However, at the end of the eighteenth century, hypochondria 
and hysteria figured, almost without dispute, on the escutcheon 
of mental disease. In 1755 Alberti published at Halle his 
dissertation De morbis imaginariis hypochondriacorum\ and 
Lieutaud, while defining hypochondria by its spasms, recognized 
that “the mind is affected as much as and perhaps more than the 
body; hence the term hypochondriac has become almost an 
offensive name avoided by physicians who would please.” As for 
hysteria, Joseph Raulin no longer ascribes to it any organic 
reality, at least in his basic definition, establishing it from the 
start in a pathology of the imagination: “This disease in which 
women invent, exaggerate, and repeat all the various absurdities 
of which a disordered imagination is capable, has sometimes 
become epidemic and contagious.” 


149 



There were thus two essential lines of development, during the 
classical period, for hysteria and hypochondria. One united them 
to form a common concept which was that of a “disease of the 
nerves”; the other shifted their meaning and their traditional 
pathological basis—sufficiently indicated by their names—and 
tended to integrate them gradually into the domain of diseases of 
the mind, beside mania and melancholia. But this integration 
was not achieved, as in the case of mania and melancholia, on 
the level of primitive qualities, perceived and imagined in their 
iconographic values. We are dealing here with an entirely 
different type of integration. 

The physicians of the classical period certainly tried to 
discover the qualities peculiar to hysteria and hypochondria. But 
they never reached the point of perceiving that particular 
coherence, that qualitative cohesion which gave mania and 
melancholia their unique contour. All qualities were 
contradictorily invoked, each annulling the others, leaving 
untouched the problem of what was the ultimate nature of these 
two diseases. 

Often hysteria was perceived as the effect of an internal heat 
that spread throughout the entire body, an effervescence, an 
ebullition ceaselessly manifested in convulsions and spasms. Was 
this heat not related to the amorous ardor with which hysteria 
was so often linked, in girls looking for husbands and in young 
widows who had lost theirs? Hysteria was ardent, by nature; its 
symptoms referred more easily to an image than to an illness; 
that image was drawn by Jacques Ferrand, at the beginning of 
the seventeenth century, in all its material precision. In his 
Maladie d'amour ou melancholie erotique , he declared that women 
were more often distracted by love than men; but with what art 
they could dissimulate it! “In which their mien is similar to 
alembics featly resting upon cylinders, without one’s being able 
to see the fire from without, yet if one looks beneath the alembic, 


150 



and places one’s hand upon a woman’s heart, one will find in 
both places a fiery furnace.” An admirable image, in its symbolic 
weight, its affective overtones, and the referential play of its 
imagery. Long after Ferrand, one finds the qualifying theme of 
humid heat used to characterize the secret distillations of hysteria 
and of hypochondria; but the image yielded to a more abstract 
motif. Already in Nicolas Chesneau, the flame of the feminine 
alembic had grown quite colorless: “I say that the hysterical 
affection is not a simple one, but that we understand by this 
name several diseases caused by a malign vapor which arises in 
some way or other, is corrupted, and undergoes an extraordinary 
effervescence.” For others, on the contrary, the heat rising from 
