rather as the consequence of a profound natural affinity which 
was of the order of their secret nature. Willis does not cite a 
single case of alternation which he had occasion to observe; what 
he first discovered was an internal relation which engendered 
strange metamorphoses: “After melancholia, we must consider 
mania, with which it has so many affinities that these complaints 
often change into one another”: it happens, in fact, that the 
melancholic predisposition, if aggravated, becomes frenzy; 
frenzy, on the contrary, when it decreases and loses its force, 
finally grows calm and turns to melancholic diathesis. A rigorous 
empiricism would see two related diseases here, or even two 
successive symptoms of the same disease. However, Willis does 
not pose the problem in terms of symptoms nor in terms of 
disease; he merely seeks the link connecting two states in the 
dynamics of animal spirits. In the melancholic, we remember, 
the spirits were somber and dim; they cast their shadows over the 
images of things and formed a kind of dark tide; in the maniac, 
on the contrary, the spirits seethed in a perpetual ferment; they 
were carried by an irregular movement, constantly repeated; a 
movement that eroded and consumed, and even without fever, 
sent out its heat. Between mania and melancholia, the affinity is 
evident: not the affinity of symptoms linked in experience, but 
the affinity—more powerful and so much more evident in the 
landscapes of the imagination—that unites in the same fire both 
smoke and flame. “If we can say that in melancholia, the brain 


142 



and the animal spirits are obscured by smoke and a dense vapor, 
mania seems to ignite a kind of conflagration hitherto muffled by 
them.” The flame in its rapid movement dissipates the smoke; 
but the smoke, when it falls back, smothers the flame and 
extinguishes its brightness. The combination of mania and 
melancholy is not, for Willis, a disease; it is a secret fire in which 
flame and smoke are in conflict; it is the vehicle of that light and 
that shadow. 

Virtually all of the physicians of the eighteenth century 
acknowledged the proximity of mania and melancholia. Several, 
however, refused to call them two manifestations of the same 
disease. Many observed a succession without perceiving a 
symptomatic unity. Sydenham prefers to divide the domain of 
mania itself: on one hand, ordinary mania—due to “an 
overexcited and too rapid blood”; on the other, a mania which, as 
a general rule, “degenerates into stupidity.” The latter “results 
from the weakness of the blood which too long a fermentation 
has deprived of its most spirituous parts.” Even more often, it is 
