irons, prisons, and dungeons in the said Hopital General and the 
places thereto appertaining so much as they deem necessary, no 
appeal will be accepted from the regulations they establish within 
the said hospital; and as for such regulations as intervene from 
without, they will be executed according to their form and tenor, 
notwithstanding opposition or whatsoever appeal made or to be 
made, and without prejudice to these, and for which, 
notwithstanding all defense or suits for justice, no distinction will 
be made.”- A quasi-absolute sovereignty, jurisdiction without 
appeal, a writ of execution against which nothing can prevail— 
the Hopital General is a strange power that the King establishes 
between the police and the courts, at the limits of the law: a third 
order of repression. The insane whom Pinel would find at 
Bicetre and at La Salpetriere belonged to this world. 

In its functioning, or in its purpose, the Hopital General had 
nothing to do with any medical concept. It was an instance of 
order, of the monarchical and bourgeois order being organized in 
France during this period. It was directly linked with the royal 
power which placed it under the authority of the civil 
government alone; the Grand Almonry of the Realm, which 
previously formed an ecclesiastical and spiritual mediation in the 
politics of assistance, was abruptly elided. The King decreed: 
“We choose to be guardian and protector of the said Hopital 
General as being of our royal founding and especially as it does 
not depend in any manner whatsoever upon our Grand Almonry, 
nor upon any of our high officers, but is to be totally exempt 
from the direction, visitation, and jurisdiction of the officers of 
the General Reform and others of the Grand Almonry, and from 
all others to whom we forbid all knowledge and jurisdiction in 
any fashion or manner whatsoever.” The origin of the project 
had been parliamentary, and the first two administrative heads 
appointed were the first President of the Parlement and the 
Procurator General. But they were soon supplemented by the 


52 


Archbishop of Paris, the President of the Court of Assistance, 
the President of the Court of Exchequer, the Chief of Police, 
and the Provost of Merchants. Henceforth the “Grand Bureau” 
had no more than a deliberative role. The actual administration 
and the real responsibilities were entrusted to agents recruited by 
co-optation. These were the true governors, the delegates of 
royal power and bourgeois fortune to the world of poverty. The 
Revolution was able to give them this testimony: “Chosen from 
the best families of the bourgeoisie,... they brought to their 
administration disinterested views and pure intentions.”3 

