
195 



same result. It is in this spirit that Boerhaave performed his 
famous cure of convulsives at Haarlem. In the city hospital, an 
epidemic of convulsions had broken out. Antispasmodics, 
administered in strong doses, did no good. Boerhaave ordered 
“that stoves filled with burning coals be brought, and that iron 
hooks of a certain form be heated in them; thereupon, he said in 
a loud voice that since all the means hitherto employed in 
attempting to cure the convulsions had been useless, he knew of 
only one other remedy, which was to burn to the bone, with red- 
hot irons, a certain spot on the arm of any person, male or 
female, who suffered an attack of a convulsive illness.”15 

Slower, but also more certain of the truth it confronts, is the 
awakening that proceeds from wisdom itself and from its 
insistent, imperative progress through the landscapes of madness. 
From this wisdom, in its various forms, Willis sought the cure of 
the various madnesses. For imbeciles, a pedagogical wisdom; an 
“attentive and devoted master must educate them completely”; 
they must be taught, little by little and very slowly, what children 
are taught in school. For melancholics, a wisdom that takes as its 
model the most rigorous and most evident forms of truth: what 
is imaginary in their delirium will disappear in the light of an 
incontestable truth; this is why “mathematical and chemical” 
studies are strongly recommended. For the others, the wisdom of 
a well-ordered life will reduce their delirium; there is no need to 
impose upon them any other truth than that of their everyday 
life; remaining in their homes, “they must continue to manage 
their affairs, direct their families, order and cultivate their estates, 
their gardens, their orchards, their fields.” It is, on the contrary, 
the exactitude of a social order, imposed from without and, if 
necessary, by force, that can gradually restore the minds of 
maniacs to the light of truth: “For this, the insane person, placed 
in a special house, will be treated, either by the doctor or by 
trained assistants, in such a way that he may be always 


196 


maintained in his duty, in his appearance and habits, by 
warnings, by remonstrances, and by punishments immediately 

inflicted.” 16 

Little by little during the classical period, this authoritarian 
