much better students of the psyche can look at the future, after 
reading this sobering re-creation of yesteryear’s madness and the 
ineffective attempts of humanity to treat it by amputation, 
projections, prejudices, and segregation. 

JOSE BARCHILON, M.D. 


My only quarrel with the book is the lack of emphasis on the 
humoristic elements in psychoses and neuroses: i.e., the patient 
laughs at himself, or laughs at the world through his illness. 

t The fear and dread of madness is as real a factor in social and 
medical attitudes or measures as anxiety, symptoms, and 
resistance in coping with impulses from the individual 
unconscious; even though the author does not explicitly 
compare madness with the unconscious, he equates madness 
and dream activity so that the inference is clear enough. 


8 



PREFACE 


PASCAL: “Men are so necessarily mad, that not to be mad 
would amount to another form of madness.” And Dostoievsky, in 
his DIARY OF A WRITER: “It is not by confining one’s 
neighbor that one is convinced of one’s own sanity.” 

We have yet to write the history of that other form of madness, by 
which men,, in an act of sovereign reason, confine their neighbors, and 
communicate and recognize each other through the merciless language 
of non-madness; to define the moment of this conspiracy before it was 
permanently established in the realm of truth, before it was revived by 
the lyricism of protest. We must try to return, in history, to that zero 
point in the course of madness at which madness is an undifferentiated 
experience, a not yet divided experience of division itself We must 
describe, from the start of its trajectory, that “other form” which 
relegates Reason and Madness to one side or the other of its action as 
things henceforth external\ deaf to all exchange, and as though dead to 
one another. 

This is doubtless an uncomfortable region. To explore it we must 
renounce the convenience of terminal truths, and never let ourselves be 
guided by what we may know of madness. None of the concepts oj 
psychopathology, even and especially in the implicit process oj 
retrospections, can play an organizing role. What is constitutive is the 
