of madness to our own experience> which confines insanity within 
mental illness. In the Middle Ages and until the Renaissance, mans 
dispute with madness was a dramatic debate in which he confronted 
the secret powers of the world; the experience of madness was clouded 
by images of the Fall and the Will of God\ of the Beast and the 
Metamorphosis , and of all the marvelous secrets of Knowledge. In our 
era; the experience of madness remains silent in the composure of a 
knowledge which, knowing too much about madness> forgets it. But 
from one of these experiences to the other , the shift has been made by a 
world without images, without positive character , in a kind of silent 
transparency which reveals—as mute institution , act without 
commentary , immediate knowledge—a great motionless structure; this 
structure is one of neither drama nor knowledge; it is the point where 
history is immobilized in the tragic category which both establishes 
and impugns it. 


12 



CONTENTS 


Cover 

Other Books by This Author 

Title Page 

Copyright 

Introduction 



I “Stultifera Navis ” 

II The Great Confinement 

III The Insane 

IV Passion and Delirium 

V Aspects of Madness 

VI Doctors and Patients 

VII The Great Fear 

VIII The New Division 

IX The Birth of the Asylum 

Conclusion 

Notes 

About the Author 
Books by Michel Foucault 


13 


I 



14 


“STULTIFERA 


NAVIS” 


AT the end of the Middle Ages, leprosy disappeared from the 
Western world. In the margins of the community, at the gates of 
cities, there stretched wastelands which sickness had ceased to 
haunt but had left sterile and long uninhabitable. For centuries, 
these reaches would belong to the non-human. From the 
fourteenth to the seventeenth century, they would wait, soliciting 
with strange incantations a new incarnation of disease, another 
grimace of terror, renewed rites of purification and exclusion. 

From the High Middle Ages to the end of the Crusades, 
leprosariums had multiplied their cities of the damned over the 
entire face of Europe. According to Mathieu Paris, there were as 
many as 19,000 of them throughout Christendom. In any case, 
around 1226, when Louis VIII established the lazar-house law 
for France, more than 2,000 appeared on the official registers. 
There were 43 in the diocese of Paris alone: these included 
Bourg-le-Reine, Corbeil, Saint-Valere, and the sinister Champ- 
Pourri (Rotten Field); included also was Charenton. The two 
largest were in the immediate vicinity of Paris: Saint-Germain 
and Saint-Lazare:l we shall hear their names again in the history 
of another sickness. This is because from the fifteenth century 
on, all were emptied; in the next century Saint-Germain became 
