suspicious of the effects of too strict a devotion, too strong a 
belief. Too much moral rigor, too much anxiety about salvation 
and the life to come were often thought to bring on melancholia. 
The Encyclopedie does not fail to cite such cases: “The 
intemperate impressions made by certain extravagant preachers, 
the excessive fears they inspire of the pains with which our 
religion threatens those who break its laws, produce astonishing 
revolutions in weak minds. At the hospital of Montelimar, 
several women were reported suffering from mania and 
melancholia as a result of a mission held in that city; these 
creatures were ceaselessly struck by the horrible images that had 
thoughtlessly been presented to them; they spoke of nothing but 
despair, revenge, punishment, etc., and one of them absolutely 
refused to undergo any cure, convinced that she was in Hell and 
that nothing could extinguish the fire she believed was devouring 
her.” Pinel follows the line of these enlightened physicians— 
forbidding books of devotion to be given to “melancholics by 
piety,” even recommending solitary confinement for “religious 
persons who believe themselves to be inspired and who seek to 
make proselytes.” But this again is more of a critique than a 
positive analysis: the religious object or theme is suspected of 
arousing delirium and hallucination by the delirious and 
hallucinatory nature attributed to it. Pinel reports the case of a 
recently cured madman who had “read in a religious book ... that 
each man has his guardian angel; on the following night, he 
thought he was surrounded by a choir of angels and imagined he 
heard celestial music and received revelations.” Religion is 
considered here only as an element in the transmission of error. 
But even before Pinel, there had been analyses of a more rigorous 


226 



historical nature, in which religion appeared as a milieu of 
satisfaction or repression of the passions. In 1781 a German 
author described as happy those distant eras when priests were 
endowed with absolute powers: then idleness did not exist, every 
moment was marked by “ceremonies, religious practices, 
pilgrimages, visits to the poor and the sick, calendar festivals.”! 1 
Time was thus assigned to an organized happiness, which left no 
leisure for empty passions, for disgust with life, for boredom. If a 
man felt guilty, he was subjected to real, often material 
punishment which occupied his mind and gave him an assurance 
that the transgression was redressed. And when the confessor 
encountered those “hypochondriacal penitents who came too 
often to confession,” he assigned them as penance either a severe 
hardship that “diluted their too thick blood,” or long pilgrimages: 
“The change of air, the length of the road, absence from home, 
distance from the things which upset them, their associations 
with other pilgrims, the slow and energetic movement of 
walking, had more effect upon them than the comfortable 
journeys ... that in our day take the place of pilgrimages.” 
Finally, the sacred nature of the priest gave each of his 
injunctions an absolute value, and no one dreamed of trying to 
avoid it; “usually the whims of sick people deny all this to the 
physician.” For Moehsen, religion is the mediation between man 
and transgression, between man and punishment: in the form of 
an authoritarian synthesis, it suppresses the transgression by 
imposing the punishment; if, on the contrary, religion loosens its 
hold but maintains the ideal forms of remorse of conscience, of 
spiritual mortification, it leads directly to madness; only the 
consistency of the religious milieu can permit man to escape 
alienation in the excessive delirium of transgressions. By 
accomplishing its rites and its requirements, man avoids both the 
useless idleness of his passions before the transgression, and the 
vain repetition of his remorse once the transgression is 


227 


committed; religion organizes all human life around fulfillment 
of the moment. That old religion of happier times was the 
perpetual celebration of the present. But once it was idealized in 
the modern age, religion cast a temporal halo around the present, 
an empty milieu—that of idleness and remorse, in which the 
heart of man is abandoned to its own anxiety, in which the 
passions surrender time to unconcern or to repetition in which, 
finally, madness can function freely. 

3. Madness, Civilization , and Sensibility. Civilization, in a 
general way, constitutes a milieu favorable to the development of 
madness. If the progress of knowledge dissipates error, it also has 
the effect of propagating a taste and even a mania for study; the 
life of the library, abstract speculations, the perpetual agitation of 
the mind without the exercise of the body, can have the most 
disastrous effects. Tissot explains that in the human body it is 
those parts subject to frequent work which are first strengthened 
and hardened; among laborers, the muscles and fibers of the 
arms harden, giving them their physical strength and the good 
health they enjoy until an advanced age; “among men of letters, 
the brain hardens; often they become incapable of connecting 
their ideas,” and so are doomed to dementia. The more abstract 
or complex knowledge becomes, the greater the risk of madness. 
A body of knowledge still close to what is most immediate in the 
senses, requiring, according to Pressavin, only a little work on 
the part of the inner sense and organs of the brain, provokes only 
a sort of physiological happiness: “The sciences whose objects are 
