infernal water gathers in the secrecy of its movements all the 
images in which mania takes its concrete form. It constitutes, in 
an indissociable way, both its chemical myth and its dynamic 
truth. 

In the course of the eighteenth century, the image, with all its 
mechanical and metaphysical implications, of animal spirits in 
the channels of the nerves, was frequently replaced by the image, 
more strictly physical but of an even more symbolic value, of a 
tension to which nerves, vessels, and the entire system of organic 
fibers were subject. Mania was thus a tension of the fibers carried 
to its paroxysm, the maniac a sort of instrument whose strings, 
by the effect of an exaggerated traction, began to vibrate at the 
remotest and faintest stimulus. Maniacal delirium consisted of a 
continual vibration of the sensibility. Through this image, the 
differences from melancholia became precise and were organized 
into a rigorous antithesis: the melancholic can no longer enter 
into a resonance with the external world, because his fibers are 
relaxed or because they have been immobilized by too great a 
tension (we see how the mechanics of tension explains 
melancholic immobility as well as maniacal agitation): only a few 
fibers vibrate in the melancholic, those which correspond to the 


137 



precise point of his delirium. On the contrary, the maniac 
vibrates to any and every stimulus; his delirium is universal; 
stimuli do not vanish into the density of his immobility, as in the 
melancholic’s case; when his organism returns them, they have 
been multiplied, as if the maniac had accumulated a 
supplementary energy in the tension of his fibers. It is this very 
fact, moreover, that makes the maniac, in his turn, insensible, 
not with the somnolent insensibility of the melancholic, but with 
an insensibility taut with interior vibrations; this is doubtless why 
maniacs “fear neither heat nor cold, tear off their clothes, sleep 
naked in the dead of winter without feeling the cold.” It is also 
why they substitute for the real world, which nonetheless 
continues to solicit them, the unreal and chimerical world of 
their delirium: “The essential symptoms of mania result from the 
fact that objects do not present themselves to the sufferers as 
they are in reality.”!0 The delirium of maniacs is not determined 
by a particular error of judgment; it constitutes a defect in the 
transmission of sense impressions to the brain, a flaw in 
communication. In the psychology of madness, the old idea of 
truth as “the conformity of thought to things” is transposed in 
the metaphor of a resonance, a kind of musical fidelity of the 
fibers to the sensations which make them vibrate. 
