story of a maniac subject to seizures of irrepressible violence. 
One day while he was walking in the garden of the asylum with 
the keeper, this patient suddenly entered a phase of excitation, 
moved several steps away, picked up a large stone, and made the 
gesture of throwing it at his companion. The keeper stopped, 
looked the patient in the eyes; then advanced several steps 
toward him and “in a resolute tone of voice ... commanded him 
to lay down the stone”; as he approached, the patient lowered his 
hand, then dropped his weapon; “he then submitted to be quietly 
led to his apartment.” Something had been born, which was no 
longer repression, but authority. Until the end of the eighteenth 
century, the world of madmen was peopled only by the abstract, 
faceless power which kept them confined; within these limits, it 
was empty, empty of all that was not madness itself; the guards 
were often recruited among the inmates themselves. Tuke 
established, on the contrary, a mediating element between guards 
and patients, between reason and madness. The space reserved 
by society for insanity would now be haunted by those who were 
“from the other side” and who represented both the prestige of 
the authority that confines and the rigor of the reason that 
judges. The keeper intervenes, without weapons, without 


262 



instruments of constraint, with observation and language only; 
he advances upon madness, deprived of all that could protect 
him or make him seem threatening, risking an immediate 
confrontation without recourse. In fact, though, it is not as a 
concrete person that he confronts madness, but as a reasonable 
being, invested by that very fact, and before any combat takes 
place, with the authority that is his for not being mad. Reason's 
victory over unreason was once assured only by material force, 
and in a sort of real combat. Now the combat was always decided 
beforehand, unreason's defeat inscribed in advance in the 
concrete situation where madman and man of reason meet. The 
absence of constraint in the nineteenth-century asylum is not 
unreason liberated, but madness long since mastered. 

For this new reason which reigns in the asylum, madness does 
not represent the absolute form of contradiction, but instead a 
minority status, an aspect of itself that does not have the right to 
autonomy, and can live only grafted onto the world of reason. 
Madness is childhood. Everything at the Retreat is organized so 
that the insane are transformed into minors. They are regarded 
“as children who have an overabundance of strength and make 
dangerous use of it. They must be given immediate punishments 
and rewards; whatever is remote has no effect on them. A new 
