centuries—until Dostoievsky and Nietzsche—for Christ to 
regain the glory of his madness, for scandal to recover its power 
as revelation, for unreason to cease being merely the public 
shame of reason. 

But at the very moment Christian reason rid itself of the 
madness that had so long been a part of itself, the madman, in 
his abolished reason, in the fury of his animality, received a 
singular power as a demonstration: it was as if scandal, driven out 
of that superhuman region where it related to God and where 
the Incarnation was manifested, reappeared, in the plenitude of 


90 


its force and pregnant with a new lesson, in that region where 
man has a relation to nature and to his animality. The lesson’s 
point of application has shifted to the lower regions of madness. 
The Cross is no longer to be considered in its scandal; but it 
must not be forgotten that throughout his human life Christ 
honored madness, sanctified it as he sanctified infirmity cured, 
sin forgiven, poverty assured of eternal riches. Saint Vincent de 
Paul reminds those assigned to tend the mad within the houses 
of confinement that their “rule in this is Our Lord who chose to 
be surrounded by lunatics, demoniacs, madmen, the tempted and 
the possessed.” These men ruled by the powers of the inhuman 
constitute, around those who represent eternal Wisdom, around 
the Man who incarnates it, a perpetual occasion for glorification: 
because they glorify, by surrounding it, the wisdom that has been 
denied them, and at the same time give it a pretext to humiliate 
itself, to acknowledge that it is granted only by grace. Further: 
Christ did not merely choose to be surrounded by lunatics; he 
himself chose to pass in their eyes for a madman, thus 
experiencing, in his incarnation, all the sufferings of human 
misfortune. Madness thus became the ultimate form, the final 
degree of God in man’s image, before the fulfillment and 
deliverance of the Cross: “O my Savior, you were pleased to be a 
scandal to the Jews, and a madness to the Gentiles; you were 
pleased to seem out of your senses, as it is reported in the Holy 
Gospel that it was thought of Our Lord that he had gone mad. 
Dicebant quoniam in furorem versus est. His Apostles sometimes 
looked upon him as a man in anger, and he seemed such to 
them, so that they should bear witness that he had borne with all 
our infirmities and all our states of affliction, and to teach them 
and us as well to have compassion upon those who fall into these 
infirmities.” 10 Coming into this world, Christ agreed to take 
upon himself all the signs of the human condition and the very 
stigmata of fallen nature; from poverty to death, he followed the 

