the rotatory machine was soon used as a threat and a 
punishment, we see the impoverishment of the meanings which 
had richly sustained the therapeutic methods throughout the 
entire classical period. Medicine was now content to regulate and 
to punish, with means which had once served to exorcise sin, to 
dissipate error in the restoration of madness to the world’s 
obvious truth. 

In 1771, Bienville wrote apropos of Nymphomania that there 
were times when it could be cured “merely by treating the 
imagination; but there were none or almost none when physical 
remedies alone could effect a radical cure.” And a little later, 
Beauchesne: “One would undertake in vain to cure a man 
suffering from madness, if one tried to succeed by physical means 
alone.... Material remedies can never enjoy a complete success 


188 



without that succor which a strong and healthy mind affords a 
weak and sick one.” 

Such texts do not discover the necessity of a psychological 
treatment; rather they mark the end of an era: the era when the 
difference between physical medicaments and moral treatments 
was not yet accepted as obvious by medical thought. The unity of 
the symbols begins to break down, and the techniques lose their 
total significance. They are no longer credited with more than a 
local efficacity—on the body or on the soul. The cure again 
changes direction; it is no longer determined by the meaningful 
unity of the disease, organized around its major qualities; but, 
segment by segment, must address itself to the various elements 
that compose the disease; the cure will consist of a series of 
partial destructions, in which psychological attack and physical 
intervention are juxtaposed, complement each other, but never 
interpenetrate. 

In fact, what to us seems already the outline of a psychological 
cure was no such thing to the classical physicians who applied it. 
Since the Renaissance, music had regained all those therapeutic 
virtues antiquity had attributed to it. Its effects were especially 
remarkable upon madness. Johann Schenck cured a man “fallen 
into a profound melancholia” by having him attend “concerts of 
musical instruments that particularly pleased him”; Wilhelm 
Albrecht also cured a delirious patient, after having tried all other 
remedies in vain, by prescribing the performance, during one of 
his attacks, of “a little song which awakened the sufferer, pleased 
him, excited him to laugh, and dispelled the paroxysm forever.” 
