help the poor escape their provisional indigence? They were kept 
from doing so: the labor market was limited, which was all the 
more dangerous in that this was precisely a period of crisis. On 
the contrary, the high cost of products should have been palliated 
by a cheap labor force, their scarcity being compensated by a new 
industrial and agricultural effort. The only reasonable remedy: to 
restore this entire population to the circuit of production, in 
order to distribute it to the points where the labor force was 
rarest. To utilize the poor, vagabonds, exiles, and emigres of all 
kinds, was one of the secrets of wealth, in the competition 


243 



among nations: “What is the best means of weakening the 
neighboring states whose power and industry tend to overshadow 
us?” asked Josias Tucker apropos of the emigration of the 
Protestants. “Is it to force their subjects to remain at home by 
refusing to receive and incorporate them among us, or is it to 
attract them to us by good wages, allowing them to enjoy the 
advantages of the other citizens?” 

Confinement is open to criticism because of the repercussions 
it can have on the labor market; but still more, because it 
constitutes, and with it the entire enterprise of traditional 
charity, a dangerous financing. Like the Middle Ages, the 
classical period had always sought to provide aid to the poor by 
the system of foundations. This meant that a share of land 
capital or income was thereby immobilized. And for good, since, 
in the just concern to avoid the commercialization of the charity 
enterprises, all juridical measures were taken so that these goods 
would never return to circulation. But with the passage of time, 
their utility diminished; the economic situation changed, poverty 
altered its aspect: “Society does not always have the same needs; 
nature and the distribution of property, the division between the 
different orders of the people, the opinions, the customs, the 
general occupations of the nation or of its different portions, the 
climate itself, the diseases and other accidents of human life 
undergo a continual variation; new needs are born; others cease 
to make themselves felt.”9 The definitive character of the 
foundation was in contradiction to the variable and indefinite 
rate of the accidental needs which it was supposed to satisfy. 
Without the wealth which it immobilized being restored to 
circulation, new wealth had to be created as new needs appeared. 
The share of funds and revenues which were set aside constantly 
increased, thereby diminishing the productive share. Which 
inevitably led to a greater poverty, hence to more numerous 
foundations. And the process could extend indefinitely. The 
