made of glass, he thereby concludes that he is fragile, that he is 
in danger of breaking, that he must touch no object which might 
be too resistant, that he must in fact remain motionless, and so 
on. Such reasonings are those of a madman; but again we must 
note that in themselves they are neither absurd nor illogical. On 
the contrary, they apply correctly the most rigorous figures of 
logic. And Paul Zacchias has no difficulty finding them, in all 
their rigor, among the insane. Syllogism, in a man letting himself 
starve to death: “The dead do not eat; I am dead; hence I do not 
eat.” Induction extended to infinity, in a man suffering from 
persecution delusions: “A, B, and C are my enemies; all of them 
are men; therefore all men are my enemies.” Enthymeme, in 
another sufferer: “Most of those who have lived in this house are 
dead, hence I, who have lived in this house, am dead.” The 
marvelous logic of the mad which seems to mock that of the 
logicians because it resembles it so exactly, or rather because it is 
exactly the same, and because at the secret heart of madness, at 
the core of so many errors, so many absurdities, so many words 
and gestures without consequence, we discover, finally, the 
hidden perfection of a language. “From these things,” Zacchias 
concludes, “you truly see how best to discuss the intellect.” The 
ultimate language of madness is that of reason, but the language 
of reason enveloped in the prestige of the image, limited to the 
locus of appearance which the image defines. It forms, outside 
the totality of images and the universality of discourse, an 
abusive, singular organization whose insistent quality constitutes 


105 



madness. Madness, then, is not altogether in the image, which of 
itself is neither true nor false, neither reasonable nor mad; nor is 
it, further, in the reasoning which is mere form, revealing 
nothing but the indubitable figures of logic. And yet madness is 
in one and in the other: in a special version or figure of their 
relationship. 

Let us consider an example borrowed from Diemerbroek. A 
man was suffering from a profound melancholia. As with all 
melancholics, his mind was attached to a fixed idea, and this idea 
was for him the occasion of a constantly renewed sadness. He 
accused himself of having killed his son, and in the excess of his 
remorse, declared that God, for his punishment, had assigned a 
demon to tempt him, like the demon which had tempted the 
Lord. This demon he saw, spoke to, heard, and answered. He 
did not understand why those around him refused to 
acknowledge such a presence. Such then is madness: this 
remorse, this belief, this hallucination, these speeches; in short, 
this complex of convictions and images which constitutes a 
delirium. Now Diemerbroek tries to find out what are the 
“causes” of this madness, how it can have originated. And this is 
what he learns: this man had taken his son bathing and the boy 
had drowned. Hence the father considered himself responsible 
for his sons death. We can therefore reconstitute in the 
following manner the development of this madness: judging 
himself guilty, the man decides that homicide is execrable in the 
sight of God on High; whence it occurs to his imagination that 
he is eternally damned; and since he knows that the chief 
torment of damnation consists in being delivered into Satan’s 
hands, he tells himself “that a horrible demon is assigned to 
him.” This demon he does not as yet see, but since “he does not 
cease thinking of it,” and “regards this notion as necessarily true,” 
he imposes on his brain a certain image of this demon; this 
image is presented to his soul by the action of the brain and of 
the spirits with such insistence that he believes he continually 


106 



sees the demon itself.”12 

Hence madness, as analyzed by Diemerbroek, has two levels; 
one is manifest to all eyes: an unwarranted melancholia in a man 
who wrongly accuses himself of having killed his son; a depraved 
imagination which pictures demons; a dismantled reason which 
converses with a phantom. But at a deeper level, we find a 
rigorous organization dependent on the faultless armature of a 
discourse. This discourse, in its logic, commands the firmest 
belief in itself, it advances by judgments and reasonings which 
connect together; it is a kind of reason in action. In short, under 
the chaotic and manifest delirium reigns the order of a secret 
delirium. In this second delirium, which is, in a sense, pure 
reason, reason delivered of all the external tinsel of dementia, is 
located the paradoxical truth of madness. And this in a double 
sense, since we find here both what makes madness true 
(irrefutable logic, perfectly organized discourse, faultless 
connection in the transparency of a virtual language) and what 
makes it truly madness (its own nature, the special style of all its 
manifestations, and the internal structure of delirium). 

But still more profoundly, this delirious language is the 
ultimate truth of madness insofar as it is madness’s organizing 
form, the determining principle of all its manifestations, whether 
of the body or of the soul. For if Diemerbroek’s melancholic 
converses with his demon, it is because the demon’s image has 
been profoundly impressed by the movement of spirits on the 
