trace of the object in the brain and its image in the soul, thus 
forming in the body a kind of geometric figure of passion which 
is merely its expressive transposition; but which also constitutes 
passion’s essential causal basis, for when all the spirits are 
grouped around this object of passion, or at least around its 
image, the mind in its turn can tao longer ignore it and will 
consequently be subject to passion. 


97 


One more step, and the entire system becomes a unity in 
which body and soul communicate immediately in the symbolic 
values of common qualities. This is what happens in the 
medicine of solids and fluids, which dominates eighteenth- 
century practice. Tension and release, hardness and softness, 
rigidity and relaxation, congestion and dryness—these qualitative 
states characterize the soul as much as the body, and ultimately 
refer to a kind of indistinct and composite passional situation, 
one which imposes itself on the concatenation of ideas, on the 
course of feelings, on the state of fibers, on the circulation of 
fluids. The theme of causality here appears as too discursive, the 
elements it groups too disjunct for its schemas to be applicable. 
Are the “active passions, such as anger, joy, lust,” causes or 
consequences “of the excessive strength, the excessive tension, 
and the excessive elasticity of the nervous fibers, and of the 
excessive activity of the nervous fluid”? Conversely, cannot the 
“inert passions, such as fear, depression, ennui, lack of appetite, 
the coldness that accompanies homesickness, bizarre appetites, 
stupidity, lack of memory” be as readily followed as they are 
preceded by “weakness of the brain marrow and of the nervous 
fibers distributed in the organs, by impoverishment and inertia of 

the fluids”?^ Indeed, we must no longer try to situate passion in 
a causal succession, or halfway between the corporeal and the 
spiritual; passion indicates, at a new, deeper level, that the soul 
and the body are in a perpetual metaphorical relation in which 
qualities have no need to be communicated because they are 
already common to both; and in which phenomena of expression 
are not causes, quite simply because soul and body are always 
each other s immediate expression. Passion is no longer exactly at 
the geometrical center of the body-and-soul complex; it is, a 
little short of that, at the point where their opposition is not yet 
given, in that region where both their unity and their distinction 
are established. 


98 


But at this level, passion is no longer simply one of the causes 
—however powerful—of madness; rather it forms the basis for 
its very possibility. If it is true that there exists a realm, in the 
relations of soul and body, where cause and effect, determinism 
and expression still intersect in a web so dense that they actually 
form only one and the same movement which cannot be 
dissociated except after the fact; if it is true that prior to the 
violence of the body and the vivacity of the soul, prior to the 
softening of the fibers and the relaxation of the mind, there are 
qualitative, as yet unshared kinds of a priori which subsequently 
impose the same values on the organic and on the spiritual, then 
we see that there can be diseases such as madness which are from 
the start diseases of the body and of the soul, maladies in which 
the affection of the brain is of the same quality, of the same 
origin, of the same nature, finally, as the affection of the soul. 

The possibility of madness is therefore implicit in the very 
phenomenon of passion. 

It is true that long before the eighteenth century, and for a 
long series of centuries from which we have doubtless not 
emerged, passion and madness were kept in close relation to one 
another. But let us allow the classical period its originality. The 
moralists of the Greco-Latin tradition had found it just that 
madness be passion’s chastisement; and to be more certain that 
this was the case, they chose to define passion as a temporary and 
attenuated madness. But classical thought could define a relation 
between passion and madness which was not on the order of a 
pious hope, a pedagogic threat, or a moral synthesis; it even 
broke with the tradition by inverting the terms of the 
concatenation; it based the chimeras of madness on the nature of 
passion; it saw that the determinism of the passions was nothing 
but a chance for madness to penetrate the world of reason; and 
that if the unquestioned union of body and soul manifested 
man s finitude in passion, it laid this same man open, at the same 
time, to the infinite movement that destroyed him. 


99 



Madness, then, was not merely one of the possibilities 
afforded by the union of soul and body; it was not just one of the 
consequences of passion. Instituted by the unity of soul and 
body, madness turned against that unity and once again put it in 
question. Madness, made possible by passion, threatened by a 
movement proper to itself what had made passion itself possible. 
Madness was one of those unities in which laws were 
