experienced by hypochondriacs and hysterics have their seat in 
the nervous parts, and especially in the membranes of the 
stomach and the intestines, from which they are communicated 
by the intercostal nerve to the head, to the chest, to the kidneys, 
to the liver, and to all the principal organs of the body.” 

The role Hoffmann assigns to the intestines, the stomach, and 
the intercostal nerve is indicative of the manner in which the 
problem was presented in the classical period. It was not so much 
a question of escaping the old localization in the uterus, but of 
discovering the principle and the pathways of a diverse, 
polymorphous disease dispersed throughout the entire body. A 
disease was to be accounted for that could attack the head as well 
as the legs, express itself in a paralysis or in frenzied movements, 
that could bring on catalepsy or insomnia: in short, a disease that 
traversed corporeal space so rapidly and so ingeniously that it was 
virtually present throughout the entire body. 

It is futile to insist on the change of medical horizons that 
occurred from Marinello to Hoffmann. Nothing subsists of that 
famous mobility ascribed to the uterus, which had constantly 
figured in the Hippocratic tradition. Nothing, except perhaps a 
certain theme which appeared more clearly now that it was no 
longer confined to a single medical theory, but persisted 
unchanged through the succession of speculative concepts and 
explanatory schemas. This was the theme of a dynamic upheaval 
of corporeal space, of a tide of the lower powers, which, too long 
constrained and, as it were, congested, began to seethe and 
ultimately spread their disorder—with or without the brain’s 


156 



mediation—through the entire body. This theme remained 
almost stationary until the beginning of the eighteenth century, 
despite the complete reorganization of physiological concepts. 
And strangely enough, it was during the eighteenth century, 
when no theoretical or experimental innovation in pathology had 
occurred, that the theme was suddenly modified, changed 
direction—that a dynamics of corporeal space was replaced by a 
morality of sensibility. It was then, and only then, that the ideas 
of hysteria and hypochondria were to veer, and definitively enter 
the world of madness. 

We must try now to reconstitute the evolution of the theme, 
in each of its three stages: 

1. a dynamics of organic and moral penetration; 

2. a physiology of corporeal continuity; 

3. an ethic of nervous sensibility. 

If corporeal space is perceived as a solid and continuous whole, 
the disordered movement of hysteria and of hypochondria could 
result only from an element whose extreme tenuousness and 
incessant mobility permitted it to penetrate into the place 
occupied by the solids themselves. As Nathaniel Highmore put 
it, the animal spirits, “because of their igneous tenuity, can 
penetrate even the densest, the most compact bodies ..., and 
because of their activity, can penetrate the entire microcosm in a 
single instant.” The spirits, if their mobility increased, if 
penetration occurred, chaotically and in an untimely manner, in 
all the parts of the body to which they were unsuited, provoked a 
thousand diverse signs of disturbance. Hysteria, for Highmore as 
for Willis, his adversary, and for Sydenham as well, was the 
disease of a body indiscriminately penetrable to all the efforts of 
the spirits, so that the internal order of organs gave way to the 
incoherent space of masses passively subject to the chaotic 
movement of the spirits. These latter “move impetuously and in 
excessive quantity upon such or such a part, there causing spasms 


157 



or even pain ... and disturbing the function of the organs, both 
those which they abandon and those toward which they move, 
neither being able to avoid serious damage from this unequal 
distribution of spirits, which is entirely contrary to the laws of 
animal economy.” 13 The hysterical body was thus given over to 
that disorder of the spirits which, outside of all organic laws and 
any functional necessity, could successively seize upon all the 
available spaces of the body. 

The effects varied according to the regions affected, and the 
disease, undifferentiated in the pure source of its movement, 
assumed various configurations depending on the spaces it 
traversed and the surfaces where it appeared: “Having 
accumulated in the stomach, they rush in a host and with 
impetuosity upon the muscles of the larynx and the pharynx, 
producing spasms throughout the entire area they traverse, and 
causing in the stomach a swelling which resembles a large ball.” 
A little higher, the hysterical affection, “seizing upon the colon 
and upon the region which is below the heart cavity, causes there 
an insupportable pain which resembles the iliac affection.” 
Should it rise still higher, the disease attacks “the vital parts and 
