

soldiery, and is among the twelve dualities that dispute the 
sovereignty of the human soul: Faith and Idolatry, Hope and 
Despair, Charity and Avarice, Chastity and Lust, Prudence and 
Folly, Patience and Anger, Gentleness and Harshness, Concord 
and Discord, Obedience and Rebellion, Perseverance and 
Inconstancy, Fortitude and Cowardice, Humility and Pride. In 
the Renaissance, Folly leaves this modest place and comes to the 
fore. Whereas according to Hugues de Saint-Victor the 
genealogical tree of the Vices, that of the Old Adam, had pride 
as its root, Folly now leads the joyous throng of all human 
weaknesses. Uncontested coryphaeus, she guides them, sweeps 
them on, and names them: “Recognize them here, in the group 
of my companions.... She whose brows are drawn is Philautia 
(Self-Love). She whom you see laugh with her eyes and applaud 
with her hands is Colacia (Flattery). She who seems half asleep is 
Lethe (Forgetfulness). She who leans upon her elbows and folds 
her hands is Misoponia (Sloth). She who is crowned with roses 
and anointed with perfume is Hedonia (Sensuality). She whose 
eyes wander without seeing is Anoia (Stupidity). She whose 
abundant flesh has the hue of flowers is Tryphe (Indolence). 
And here among these young women are two gods: the god of 
Good Cheer and the god of Deep Sleep.”-' The absolute 
privilege of Folly is to reign over whatever is bad in man. But 
does she not also reign indirectly over all the good he can do: 
over ambition, that makes wise politicians; over avarice, that 
makes wealth grow; over indiscreet curiosity, that inspires 
philosophers and men of learning? Louise Labe merely follows 
Erasmus when she has Mercury implore the gods: “Do not let 
that beautiful Lady perish who has given you so much pleasure.” 

But this new royalty has little in common with the dark reign 
of which we were just speaking and which communicated with 
the great tragic powers of this world. 

True, madness attracts, but it does not fascinate. It rules all 


35 


that is easy, joyous, frivolous in the world. It is madness, folly, 
which makes men “sport and rejoice,” as it has given the gods 
“Genius, Beauty, Bacchus, Silenus, and the gentle guardian of 
gardens.”6 All within it is brilliant surface: no enigma is 
concealed. 

No doubt, madness has something to do with the strange 
paths of knowledge. The first canto of Brant’s poem is devoted 
to books and scholars; and in the engraving which illustrates this 
passage in the Latin edition of 1497, we see enthroned upon his 
bristling cathedra of books the Magister who wears behind his 
doctoral cap a fool’s cap sewn with bells. Erasmus, in his dance 
of fools, reserves a large place for scholars: after the 
Grammarians, the Poets, Rhetoricians, and Writers, come the 
Jurists; after them, the “Philosophers respectable in beard and 
mantle”; finally the numberless troop of the Theologians. But if 
knowledge is so important in madness, it is not because the latter 
can control the secrets of knowledge; on the contrary, madness is 
the punishment of a disorderly and useless science. If madness is 
the truth of knowledge, it is because knowledge is absurd, and 
instead of addressing itself to the great book of experience, loses 
its way in the dust of books and in idle debate; learning becomes 
madness through the very excess of false learning. 

0 vos doctores, qui grandia normina fertis 
Respicite antiquos patris, jurisqueperitos. 

Non in candidulispensebant dogmata libris , 

Arte sed ingenua sitibundumpectus alebant. 7 

(O ye learned men, who bear great names, 

Look back at the ancient fathers, learned 
in the law. 

They did not weigh dogmas in shining 
white books, 

But fed their thirsty hearts with natural 


36 


skill.) 


According to the theme long familiar to popular satire, madness 
appears here as the comic punishment of knowledge and its 
ignorant presumption. 

In a general way, then, madness is not linked to the world and 
its subterranean forms, but rather to man, to his weaknesses, 
dreams, and illusions. Whatever obscure cosmic manifestation 
there was in madness as seen by Bosch is wiped out in Erasmus; 
madness no longer lies in wait for mankind at the four corners of 
the earth; it insinuates itself within man, or rather it is a subtle 
