as madness if it was called a work of art. But by admitting this 
very fact, there was no reduction of one by the other, but rather 
(remembering Montaigne) a discovery of the central incertitude 
where the work of art is born, at the moment when it stops being 
born and is truly a work of art. In this opposition, to which 
Tasso and Swift bore witness after Lucretius—and which it was 
vain to attempt to separate into lucid intervals and crises—was 
disclosed a distance where the very truth of a work of art raised a 
problem: was it madness, or a work of art? Inspiration, or 
hallucination? A spontaneous babble of words, or the pure 
origins of language? Must its truth, even before its birth, be 
taken from the wretched truth of men, or discovered far beyond 
its origin, in the being that it presumes? The madness of the 
writer was, for other men, the chance to see being born, over and 
over again, in the discouragement of repetition and disease, the 
truth of the work of art. 

The madness of Nietzsche, the madness of Van Gogh or of 
Artaud, belongs to their work perhaps neither more nor less 


297 



profoundly, but in quite another way. The frequency in the 
modern world of works of art that explode out of madness no 
doubt proves nothing about the reason of that world, about the 
meaning of such works, or even about the relations formed and 
broken between the real world and the artists who produced such 
works. And yet this frequency must be taken seriously, as if it 
were the insistence of a question: from the time of Holderlin and 
Nerval, the number of writers, painters, and musicians who have 
“succumbed” to madness has increased; but let us make no 
mistake here; between madness and the work of art, there has 
been no accommodation, no more constant exchange, no 
communication of languages; their opposition is much more 
dangerous than formerly; and their competition now allows no 
quarter; theirs is a game of life and death. Artaud’s madness does 
not slip through the fissures of the work of art; his madness is 
precisely the absence of the work of art , the reiterated presence of 
that absence, its central void experienced and measured in all its 
endless dimensions. Nietzsche’s last cry, proclaiming himself 
both Christ and Dionysos, is not on the border of reason and 
unreason, in the perspective of the work of art, their common 
dream, finally realized and immediately vanishing, of a 
reconciliation of the “shepherds of Arcady and the fishermen of 
Tiberias”; it is the very annihilation of the work of art, the point 
where it becomes impossible and where it must fall silent; the 
hammer has just fallen from the philosopher’s hands. And Van 
Gogh, who did not want to ask “permission from doctors to 
paint pictures,” knew quite well that his work and his madness 
were incompatible. 

Madness is the absolute break with the work of art; it forms 
the constitutive moment of abolition, which dissolves in time the 
truth of the work of art; it draws the exterior edge, the line of 
dissolution, the contour against the void. Artaud’s oeuvre 
experiences its own absence in madness, but that experience, the 
fresh courage of that ordeal, all those words hurled against a 


298 



fundamental absence of language, all that space of physical 
suffering and terror which surrounds or rather coincides with the 
void—that is the work of art itself: the sheer cliff over the abyss 
of the work’s absence. Madness is no longer the space of 
indecision through which it was possible to glimpse the original 
truth of the work of art, but the decision beyond which this truth 
ceases irrevocably, and hangs forever over history. It is of little 
importance on exactly which day in the autumn of 1888 
Nietzsche went mad for good, and after which his texts no 
longer afford philosophy but psychiatry: all of them, including 
the postcard to Strindberg, belong to Nietzsche, and all are 
related to The Birth of Tragedy. But we must not think of this 
continuity in terms of a system, of a thematics, or even of an 
existence: Nietzsche’s madness—that is, the dissolution of his 
thought—is that by which his thought opens out onto the 
modern world. What made it impossible makes it immediate for 
us; what took it from Nietzsche offers it to us. This does not 
mean that madness is the only language common to the work of 
art and the modern world (dangers of the pathos of malediction, 
inverse and symmetrical danger of psychoanalyses); but it means 
that, through madness, a work that seems to drown in the world, 
to reveal there its non-sense, and to transfigure itself with the 
features of pathology alone, actually engages within itself the 
world’s time, masters it, and leads it; by the madness which 
interrupts it, a work of art opens a void, a moment of silence, a 
question without answer, provokes a breach without 
reconciliation where the world is forced to question itself. What 
is necessarily a profanation in the work of art returns to that 
point, and, in the time of that work swamped in madness, the 
world is made aware of its guilt. Henceforth, and through the 
mediation of madness, it is the world that becomes culpable (for 
the first time in the Western world) in relation to the work of 
art; it is now arraigned by the work of art, obliged to order itself 
by its language, compelled by it to a task of recognition, of 
