

299 



reparation, to the task of restoring reason from that unreason and 
to that unreason. The madness in which the work of art is 
engulfed is the space of our enterprise, it is the endless path to 
fulfillment, it is our mixed vocation of apostle and exegete. This 
is why it makes little difference when the first voice of madness 
insinuated itself into Nietzsche’s pride, into Van Gogh’s 
humility. There is no madness except as the final instant of the 
work of art—the work endlessly drives madness to its limits; 
where thereis a work of art , there is no madness ; and yet madness is 
contemporary with the work of art, since it inaugurates the time 
of its truth. The moment when, together, the work of art and 
madness are born and fulfilled is the beginning of the time when 
the world finds itself arraigned by that work of art and 
responsible before it for what it is. 

Ruse and new triumph of madness: the world that thought to 
measure and justify madness through psychology must justify 
itself before madness, since in its struggles and agonies it 
measures itself by the excess of works like those of Nietzsche, of 
Van Gogh, of Artaud. And nothing in itself, especially not what 
it can know of madness, assures the world that it is justified by 
such works of madness. 


300 



NOTES 


301 



CHAPTER I. “STULTIFERA NAVIS” 


1. Cf. J. Lebeuf, Histoire de la ville et de tout le diocese de Paris 
(Paris, 1754-58). 

2. Tristan etlseut, Bossuat edition, pp. 219-22. 

3. Pierre de Lancre, Tableau de binconstance des mauvais anges 
(Paris, 1612). 

4. In this sense, the experience of madness exhibits a rigorous 
continuity with the experience of leprosy. The ritual of the 
leper’s exclusion showed that he was, as a living man, the 
very presence of death. 

5. Erasmus, The Praise of Folly, § 9. 

6. Louise Labe, Debat defolie et dlamour (Lyons, 1566), p. 98. 

7. Sebastian Brant, Stultifera navis, Latin translation of 1497, 
fol. 11. 

8. Saint-Evremond, SirPolitik would be, act V, scene ii. 

9. Cervantes, Don Quixote, Part II, Chap. 1. 

10. T. Gazoni, L’Ospedale depassi incurabili (Ferrara, 1586). Cf. 
Charles de Beys, UOspital desfous (1635). 

11. Mathurin Regnier, Satire XIV, w. 7-10. 


302 


CHAPTER II. THE GREAT CONFINEMENT 


1. Edict of 1656, article IV. Later the Saint-Esprit and the 
Enfants-Trouves would be added, and the Savonnerie 
withdrawn. 

2. Ibid., article XII. 

3. La Rochefoucauld-Liancourfs report in the name of the 
Committee on Mendicity to the Constituent Assembly 
(.Proces verbaux de lAssemblee nationale , Vol. XXI). 

4. From a spiritual point of view, poverty at the end of the 
sixteenth and the beginning of the seventeenth century was 
experienced as an apocalyptic threat. “One of the most 
evident signs that the coming of the Son of God and the end 
of time are at hand is the extreme of both spiritual and 
temporal poverty to which the world is reduced. These are 
evil days ... afflictions have multiplied because of the 
multitude of transgressions, pain being the inseparable 
shadow of evil.” (Jean-Pierre Camus, De la mendicite legitime 
des pauvres [Douai, 1634], pp. 3-4.) 
