

Let us listen to what is said in these fantastic fragments. 

Imagination is not madness. Even if in the arbitrariness of 
hallucination, alienation finds the first access to its vain liberty, 
madness begins only beyond this point, when the mind binds 
itself to this arbitrariness and becomes a prisoner of this apparent 
liberty. At the moment he wakes from a dream, a man can 
indeed observe: “I am imagining that I am dead”: he thereby 
denounces and measures the arbitrariness of the imagination—he 
is not mad. He is mad when he posits as an affirmation of his 
death—when he suggests as having some value as truth—the 
still-neutral content of the image “I am dead.” And just as the 
consciousness of truth is not carried away by the mere presence 
of the image, but in the act which limits, confronts, unifies, or 
dissociates the image, so madness will begin only in the act 
which gives the value of truth to the image. There is an original 
innocence of the imagination: “The imagination itself does not 
err, since it neither denies nor affirms but is fixed to so great a 
degree on the simple contemplation of an image”;9 and only the 
mind can turn what is given in the image into abusive truth, in 
other words, into error, or acknowledged error, that is, into 
truth: “A drunk man thinks he sees two candles where there is 
but one; a man who has a strabismus and whose mind is 
cultivated immediately acknowledges his error and accustoms 
himself to see but one.”10 Madness is thus beyond imagination, 
and yet it is profoundly rooted in it; for it consists merely in 
allowing the image a spontaneous value, total and absolute truth. 
The act of the reasonable man who, rightly or wrongly, judges an 
image to be true or false, is beyond this image, transcends and 
measures it by what is not itself; the act of the madman never 
oversteps the image presented, but surrenders to its immediacy, 
and affirms it only insofar is it is enveloped by it: “Many persons, 
not to say all, succumb to madness only from being too 
concerned about an object.” Inside the image, confiscated by 


104 


it, and incapable of escaping from it, madness is nonetheless 
more than imagination, forming an act of undetermined content. 

What is this act? An act of faith, an act of affirmation and of 
negation—a discourse which sustains and at the same time 
erodes the image, undermines it, distends it in the course of a 
reasoning, and organizes it around a segment of language. The 
man who imagines he is made of glass is not mad, for any sleeper 
can have this image in a dream; but he is mad if, believing he is 
