action that divides madness, and not the science elaborated once this 
division is made and calm restored. What is originative is the caesura 
that establishes the distance between reason and non-reason; reasons 
subjugation of non-reason, wresting from it its truth as madness, 
crime, or disease, derives explicitly from this point. Hence we must 
speak of that initial dispute without assuming a victory, or the right 
to a victory; we must speak of those actions re-examined in history, 
leaving in abeyance all that may figure as a conclusion, as a refuge in 
truth; we shall have to speak of this act of scission, of this distance set, 


9 



of this void instituted between reason and what is not reason, without 
ever relying upon thefulfillment of what it claims to be. 

Then, and then only, can we determine the realm in which the 
man of madness and the man of reason,, moving apart, are not yet 
disjunct; and in an incipient and very crude language, antedating 
that of science, begin the dialogue of their breach, testifying in a 
fugitive way that they still speak to each other. Here madness and 
non-madness, reason and non-reason are inextricably involved: 
inseparable at the moment when they do not yet exist, and existing for 
each other , in relation to each other , in the exchange which separates 
them. 

In the serene world of mental illness, modern man no longer 
communicates with the madman: on one hand, the man of reason 
delegates the physician to madness, thereby authorizing a relation only 
through the abstract universality of disease; on the other , the man oj 
madness communicates with society only by the intermediary of an 
equally abstract reason which is order, physical and moral constraint, 
the anonymous pressure of the group, the requirements of conformity. 
As for a common language, there is no such thing; or rather, there is no 
such thing any longer; the constitution of madness as a mental illness, 
at the end of the eighteenth century, affords the evidence of a broken 
dialogue, posits the separation as already effected, and thrusts into 
oblivion all those stammered, imperfect words withoutfixed syntax in 
which the exchange between madness and reason was made. The 
language of psychiatry, which is a monologue of reason about 
madness, has been established only on the basis of such a silence. 

I have not tried to write the history of that language, but rather the 
archaeology of that silence. 

The Greeks had a relation to something that they called '$€>'•<;■. This 
relation was not merely one of condemnation; the existence oj 
Thrasymachus or of Callicles suffices to prove it, even if their language 
has reached us already enveloped in the reassuring dialectic of Socrates. 
But the Greek Logos had no contrary. 


10 



European man, since the beginning of the Middle Ages, has had a 
relation to something he calls, indiscriminately, Madness, Dementia, 
Insanity. Perhaps it is to this obscure presence that Western reason 
owes something of its depth, as the owqppoowri of the Socratic reasoners 
owes something to the threat of upQi?.. In any case, the Reason- 
Madness nexus constitutes for Western culture one of the dimensions op 
its originality; it already accompanied that culture long before 
Hieronymus Bosch, and will follow it long after Nietzsche and 
Artaud. 

What, then, is this confrontation beneath the language of reason f 
Where can an interrogation lead us which does notfollow reason in its 
horizontal course, but seeks to retrace in time that constant vertically 
which confronts European culture with what it is not, establishes its 
range by its own derangementf What realm do we enter which is 
neither the history of knowledge, nor history itself; which is controlled 
by neither the teleology of truth nor the rational sequence of causes, 
since causes have value and meaning only beyond the division f A 
realm, no doubt, where what is in question is the limits rather than 
the identity of a culture. 

The classical period—from Willis to Pinel, from the frenzies op 
Racine's Oreste to Sades Juliette and the Quinta del Sordo of Goya — 
covers precisely that epoch in which the exchange between madness 
and reason modifies its language, and in a radical manner. In the 
history of madness, two events indicate this change with a singular 
clarity: 1657, the creation of the Hopital General and the “great 
confinement ” of the poor; 1794, the liberation of the chained inmates 
of Bicetre. Between these two unique and symmetrical events, 
something happens whose ambiguity has left the historians of medicine 
at a loss: blind repression in an absolutist regime, according to some; 
but according to others, the gradual discovery by science and 
philanthropy of madness in its positive truth. As a matter of fact, 
beneath these reversible meanings, a structure is forming which does 
not resolve the ambiguity but determines it. It is this structure which 


11 



accountsfor the transition from the medieval and humanist experience 
