When Fran^ois-Emmanuel Fodere arrived at the hospital of 
Strasbourg in 1814, he found a kind of human stable, 
constructed with great care and skill: “for troublesome madmen 
and those who dirtied themselves, a kind of cage, or wooden 
closet, which could at the most contain one man of middle 
height, had been devised at the ends of the great wards.” These 
cages had gratings for floors, and did not rest on the ground but 
were raised about fifteen centimeters. Over these gratings was 
thrown a little straw “upon which the madman lay, naked or 
nearly so, took his meals, and deposited his excrement.” 

This, to be sure, is a whole security system against the violence 
of the insane and the explosion of their fury. Such outbursts are 
regarded chiefly as a social danger. But what is most important is 
that it is conceived in terms of an animal freedom. The negative 
fact that “the madman is not treated like a human being” has a 


84 



very positive content: this inhuman indifference actually has an 
obsessional value: it is rooted in the old fears which since 
antiquity, and especially since the Middle Ages, have given the 
animal world its familiar strangeness, its menacing marvels, its 
entire weight of dumb anxiety. Yet this animal fear which 
accompanies, with all its imaginary landscape, the perception of 
madness, no longer has the same meaning it had two or three 
centuries earlier: animal metamorphosis is no longer the visible 
sign of infernal powers, nor the result of a diabolic alchemy of 
unreason. The animal in man no longer has any value as the sign 
of a Beyond; it has become his madness, without relation to 
anything but itself: his madness in the state of nature. The 
animality that rages in madness dispossesses man of what is 
specifically human in him; not in order to deliver him over to 
other powers, but simply to establish him at the zero degree of 
his own nature. For classicism, madness in its ultimate form is 
man in immediate relation to his animality, without other 
reference, without any recourse. 

The day would come when from an evolutionary perspective 
this presence of animality in madness would be considered as the 
sign—indeed, as the very essence—of disease. In the classical 
period, on the contrary, it manifested the very fact that the 
madman was not a sick man. Animality, in fact, protected the 
lunatic from whatever might be fragile, precarious, or sickly in 
man. The animal solidity of madness, and that density it borrows 
from the blind world of beasts, inured the madman to hunger, 
heat, cold, pain. It was common knowledge until the end of the 
eighteenth century that the insane could support the miseries of 
existence indefinitely. There was no need to protect them; they 
had no need to be covered or warmed. When, in 1811, Samuel 
Tuke visited a workhouse in the Southern Counties, he saw cells 
where the daylight passed through little barred windows that had 
been cut in the doors. All the women were entirely naked. Now 
“the temperature was extremely rigorous, and the evening of the 


85 



day before, the thermometer had indicated a cold of 18 degrees. 
One of these unfortunate women was lying on a little straw, 
without covering.” This ability of the insane to endure, like 
animals, the worst inclemencies was still a medical dogma for 
Pinel; he would always admire “the constancy and the ease with 
which certain of the insane of both sexes bear the most rigorous 
and prolonged cold. In the month of Nivose of the Year III, on 
certain days when the thermometer indicated 10, 11, and as 
many as 16 degrees below freezing, a madman in the hospital of 
Bicetre could not endure his wool blanket, and remained sitting 
on the icy floor of his cell. In the morning, one no sooner opened 
his door than he ran in his shirt into the inner court, taking ice 
and snow by the fistful, applying it to his breast and letting it 
melt with a sort of delectation.” Madness, insofar as it partook of 
animal ferocity, preserved man from the dangers of disease; it 
afforded him an invulnerability, similar to that which nature, in 
its foresight, had provided for animals. Curiously, the 
disturbance of his reason restored the madman to the immediate 
kindness of nature by a return to animality. 

This is why, at this extreme point, madness was less than ever 
linked to medicine; nor could it be linked to the domain of 
correction. Unchained animality could be mastered only by 
discipline and brutalizing. The theme of the animal-madman was 
effectively realized in the eighteenth century, in occasional 
attempts to impose a certain pedagogy on the insane. Pinel cites 
the case of a “very famous monastic establishment, in one of the 
southern regions of France,” where a violent madman would be 
given “a precise order to change”; if he refused to go to bed or to 
eat, he “was warned that obstinacy in his deviations would be 
punished on the next day with ten strokes of the bullwhip.” If, 
on the contrary, he was submissive and docile, he was allowed “to 
take his meals in the refectory, next to the disciplinarian,” but at 
the least transgression, he was instantly admonished by a “heavy 
blow of a rod across his fingers.” Thus, by the use of a curious 


