Diseases of the nerves are essentially disorders of sympathy; 
they presuppose a state of general vigilance in the nervous system 
which makes each organ susceptible of entering into sympathy 
with any other: “In such a state of sensibility of the nervous 
system, the passions of the soul, violations of diet, sudden 
alternation of heat and cold or of heaviness and humidity of the 
atmosphere, will very readily produce morbific symptoms; so that 
with such a constitution, one will not enjoy steady or constant 
health, but generally suffer a continual succession of more or less 
severe pains.” Doubtless this exaggerated sensibility is 
compensated by zones of insensibility, of sleep, as it were; in a 


163 


general way, hysterical sufferers are those in whom this internal 
sensibility is the most exquisite, hypochondriacs possessing it, on 
the contrary, in a relatively blunted form. And of course women 
belong to the first category: is not the womb, with the brain, the 
organ that maintains most sympathy with the whole organism? It 
suffices to cite “the vomiting that generally accompanies the 
inflammation of the womb; the nausea, the disordered appetite 
that follow conception; the constriction of the diaphragm and of 
the muscles of the abdomen during childbirth; the headache, the 
heat and the pains in the back, the intestinal colic suffered when 
the time of the menstrual flow approaches.” The entire female 
body is riddled by obscure but strangely direct paths of sympathy; 
it is always in an immediate complicity with itself, to the point of 
forming a kind of absolutely privileged site for the sympathies; 
from one extremity of its organic space to the other, it encloses a 
perpetual possibility of hysteria. The sympathetic sensibility of 
her organism, radiating through her entire body, condemns 
woman to those diseases of the nerves that are called vapors. 
“The women whose systems have generally more mobility than 
those of men are more subject to nervous diseases, which are also 
more serious in them.” 1 And Whytt assures us he has witnessed 
that “the pain of a toothache caused convulsions in a young girl 
whose nerves were weak, and an unconsciousness lasting several 
hours and returning when the pain became more acute.” 

Diseases of the nerves are diseases of corporeal continuity. A 
body too close to itself, too intimate in each of its parts, an 
organic space which is, in a sense, strangely constricted: this is 
what the theme common to hysteria and hypochondria has now 
become; the rapprochement of the body with itself assumes, for 
some, the aspect of a precise—all too precise—image: such is the 
celebrated “shriveling of the nervous system” described by 
Pomme. Such images mask the problem, but do not suppress it, 
and do not keep the enterprise from continuing. 


164 


Is this sympathy, basically, a property hidden in each organ— 
that “sentiment” which Cheyne spoke of—or a real propagation 
through an intermediary element? And is the pathological 
proximity which characterizes these nervous diseases an 
exasperation of this sentiment, or a greater mobility of this 
interstitial body? 

It is a curious but doubtless characteristic phenomenon of 
medical thought in the eighteenth century, in the period when 
physiologists tried to define most precisely the functions and the 
role of the nervous system (sensibility and irritability; sensation 
and movement), that physicians used these ideas indiscriminately 
in the undifferentiated unity of pathological perception, 
articulating them according to a schema entirely different from 
that proposed by physiology. 

Sensibility and movement are not distinguished. Tissot 
explains that the child has more sensibility than anyone else 
because in him everything is lighter and more mobile; irritability, 
in the sense in which Haller understood a property of the 
nervous fiber, is identified with irritation, understood as the 
pathological state of an organ aroused by a prolonged stimulus. It 
would thus be acknowledged that nervous diseases were states of 
irritation combined with an excessive mobility of the fibers. 

“On occasion one sees persons for whom the smallest moving 
cause occasions much more movement than it produces in 
healthy persons; they cannot sustain the slightest alien 
impression. The faintest sound, the weakest light affords them 
extraordinary symptoms.”20 By this deliberately preserved 
ambiguity in the notion of irritation, medicine at the end of the 
eighteenth century could in effect show the continuity between 
disposition (irritability) and the pathological event (irritation); 
but it could also maintain both the theme of a disorder proper to 
an organ which suffers, but in a fashion all its own, a general 
attack (it is the sensibility particular to the organ which assures 


165 


this nonetheless discontinuous communication), and the idea of 
a propagation in the organism of a single disorder that can attack 
it in each of its parts (it is the mobility of the fiber which is 
responsible for this continuity, despite the diverse forms it 
