no longer recognize itself in the fantastic figures of anti-nature. 
In short, an immediate in which nature is mediatized by 
morality. In a space so arranged, madness will never again be able 
to speak the language of unreason, with all that in it transcends 
the natural phenomena of disease. It will be entirely enclosed in a 
pathology. A transformation which later periods have received as 
a positive acquisition, the accession, if not of a truth, at least of 
what would make the recognition of truth possible; but which in 
the eyes of history must appear as what it was: that is, the 
reduction of the classical experience of unreason to a strictly 
moral perception of madness, which would secretly serve as a 
nucleus for all the concepts that the nineteenth century would 
subsequently vindicate as scientific, positive, and experimental. 

This metamorphosis, which occurred in the second half of the 
eighteenth century, was initiated in the techniques of cure. But it 
very quickly appeared more generally, winning over the minds of 
reformers, guiding the great reorganization of the experience of 
madness in the last years of the century. Very soon Pinel could 
write: “How necessary it is, in order to forestall hypochondria, 
melancholia, or mania, to follow the immutable laws of 
morality!” 

In the classical period, it is futile to try to distinguish physical 
therapeutics from psychological medications, for the simple 
reason that psychology did not exist. When the consumption of 
bitters was prescribed, for example, it was not a question of 
physical treatment, since it was the soul as well as the body that 
was to be scoured; when the simple life of a laborer was 


207 


prescribed for a melancholic, when the comedy of his delirium 
was acted out before him, this was not a psychological 
intervention, since the movement of the spirits in the nerves, the 
density of the humors were principally involved. But in the first 
case, we are dealing with an art of the transformation of qualities , a 
technique in which the essence of madness is taken as nature, 
and as disease; in the second, we are dealing with an art of 
discourse, and of the restitution of truth , in which madness is 
significant as unreason. 

When, in the years that followed, this great experience of 
unreason, whose unity is characteristic of the classical period, was 
dissociated, when madness, entirely confined within a moral 
intuition, was nothing more than disease, then the distinction we 
have just established assumed another meaning; what had 
belonged to disease pertained to the organic, and what had 
belonged to unreason, to the transcendence of its discourse, was 
relegated to the psychological. And it is precisely here that 
psychology was born—not as the truth of madness, but as a sign 
that madness was now detached from its truth which was 
unreason and that it was henceforth nothing but a phenomenon 
adrift, insignificant upon the undefined surface of nature. An 
enigma without any truth except that which could reduce it. 

This is why we must do justice to Freud. Between Freud’s 
Five Case Histories and Janet’s scrupulous investigations of 
Psychological Healing , there is more than the density of a 
discovery, there is the sovereign violence of a return. Janet 
enumerated the elements of a division, drew up his inventory, 
annexed here and there, perhaps conquered. Freud went back to 
madness at the level of its language , reconstituted one of the 
essential elements of an experience reduced to silence by 
positivism; he did not make a major addition to the list of 
psychological treatments for madness; he restored, in medical 
thought, the possibility of a dialogue with unreason. Let us not 
be surprised that the most “psychological” of medications has so 


208 



quickly encountered its converse and its organic confirmations. It 
is not psychology that is involved in psychoanalysis: but precisely 
an experience of unreason that it has been psychology’s meaning, 
in the modern world, to mask. 


209 



VII 



210 


THE GREAT FEAR 


“ONE afternoon, I was there, looking a great deal, speaking 
rarely, listening as little as I could, when I was accosted by one of 
the most bizarre persons in this country, where God has not let 
them lack. He was a mixture of loftiness, baseness, good sense, 
