naturally from the image of an immobile congestion to images of 
dryness, of hardness, of rapid movement, and this by a sequence 
in which the principles of classical mechanics are at every 
moment influenced, deflected, distorted by a fidelity to 
iconographic themes which are the true organizers of this 
functional unity. 

Subsequently other images will be added, but will no longer 


144 



play a constitutive role; they will function only as so many 
interpretive variations upon the theme of a previously acquired 
unity. Witness for example the explanation Spengler proposed 
for the alternation between mania and melancholia, borrowing 
its principle from the electric battery. First there is a 
concentration of nervous power and of its fluid in a certain 
region of the system; only this sector is agitated, all the rest is in 
a state of sleep: this is the melancholic phase. But when it 
reaches a certain degree of intensity, this local charge suddenly 
expands into the entire system, which it agitates violently for a 
certain time, until its discharge is complete: this is the manic 
episode. At this level of elaboration, the image is too complex 
and too complete, it is borrowed from a model too remote to 
have an organizing role in the perception of a pathological unity. 
It is, on the contrary, suggested by that perception, which itself is 
based on unifying, though much more elementary, images. 

It is these images which are secretly present in the text of 
James’s Dictionary , one of the first in which the manic-depressive 
cycle is given as an observed phenomenon, as a unity easily 
perceived by an unprejudiced scrutiny. “It is absolutely necessary 
to reduce melancholia and mania to a single species of disease, 
and consequently to consider them in one and the same glance, 
for we find from our experiments and our day-to-day 
observations that one and the other have the same origin and the 
same cause.... The most exact observations and our daily 
experience confirm the fact, for we see that melancholics, 
especially those in whom the disposition is inveterate, easily 
become maniacal, and when the mania ceases, the melancholia 
begins again, in such a way that there is a passage and return 
from one to the other after certain periods of time.’Tl What was 
constituted, in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, under 
the influence of images, was therefore a perceptual structure, and 
not a conceptual system or even a group of symptoms. The proof 


