

259 


in the human mind, which doubtless influences in a great degree, 
though often secretly, our general manners; and which operates 
with peculiar force on our introduction into a new circle of 
acquaintance.” In classical confinement, the madman was also 
vulnerable to observation, but such observation did not, basically, 
involve him; it involved only his monstrous surface, his visible 
animality; and it included at least one form of reciprocity, since 
the sane man could read in the madman, as in a mirror, the 
imminent movement of his downfall. The observation Tuke now 
instituted as one of the great elements of asylum existence was 
both deeper and less reciprocal. It pursued in the madman the 
least perceptible signs of his madness, in the place where 
madness becomes secretly distinct from reason, begins to detach 
itself from it; and the madman cannot return this observation in 
any form, since he is merely observed; he is a kind of new arrival, 
a latecomer in the world of reason. Tuke organized an entire 
ceremonial around these observations. There were social 
occasions in the English manner, where everyone was obliged to 
imitate all the formal requirements of social existence; nothing 
else circulated except the observation that would spy out any 
incongruity, any disorder, any awkwardness where madness 
might betray itself. The directors and staff of the Retreat thus 
regularly invited several patients to “tea-parties”; the guests 
“dress in their best clothes, and vie with each other in politeness 
and propriety. The best fare is provided, and the visitors are 
treated with all the attention of strangers. The evening generally 
passes with the greatest harmony and enjoyment. It rarely 
happens that any unpleasant circumstance occurs; the patients 
control, to a wonderful degree, their different propensities; and 
the scene is at once curious and affectingly gratifying.” Curiously, 
this rite is not one of intimacy, of dialogue, of mutual 
acquaintance; it is the organization around the madman of a 
world where everything would be like and near him, but in 
which he himself would remain a stranger, the Stranger par 


260 



excellence who is judged not only by appearances but by all that 
they may betray and reveal in spite of themselves. Incessantly cast 
in this empty role of unknown visitor, and challenged in 
everything that can be known about him, drawn to the surface of 
himself by a social personality silently imposed by observation, by 
