145 


of this is that, just as in a perception, qualitative transitions could 
occur without affecting the integrity of the figure. Thus William 
Cullen would discover in mania, as in melancholia, “a principal 
object of delirium”—and, inversely, would attribute melancholia 
to “a drier and firmer tissue of the brain s medullary substance.” 

The essential thing is that the enterprise did not proceed from 
observation to the construction of explanatory images; that on 
the contrary, the images assured the initial role of synthesis, that 
their organizing force made possible a structure of perception, in 
which at last the symptoms could attain their significant value 
and be organized as the visible presence of the truth. 


146 



II. Hysteria and Hypochondria 


Two problems arise where these are concerned. 

1. To what degree is it legitimate to treat them as mental 
diseases, or at least as forms of madness? 

2. Are we entitled to treat them together, as if they constituted 
a virtual couple, similar to that formed quite early by mania and 
melancholia? 

A glance at the classifications is enough to convince us; 
hypochondria does not always appear beside dementia and 
mania; hysteria is very rarely found there. Felix Plater mentioned 
neither one among the lesions of the senses; and at the end of 
the classical period, Cullen still catalogued them in another 
category than that of the vesanias: hypochondria among the 
“adynamias, or diseases which consist of a weakness or a loss of 
movement in the vital or animal functions”; hysteria among “the 
spasmodic affections of the natural functions.” 

Moreover, in nosographic charts one rarely finds these two 
diseases grouped in a logical proximity, or even combined in the 
form of an opposition. Sauvages classifies hypochondria among 
the hallucinations—“hallucinations that concern only the 
health”—hysteria among the forms of convulsion. Linnaeus 
employs the same distinctions. Are they not both faithful to the 
teaching of Willis, who had studied hysteria in his book De 
morbis convulsivis and hypochondria in the section of De anima 
brutorum which dealt with diseases of the head, giving it the 
name of passio colica? Here it is certainly a question of two quite 
different diseases: in one case, the overheated spirits are subject 
to a reciprocal pressure which may give the impression that they 
are exploding—provoking those irregular or preternatural 
movements whose insane aspect constitutes hysterical 
convulsions. On the contrary, in passio colica , the spirits are 


147 



irritated because of a matter that is hostile and inappropriate to 
them ( infest a et improportionnata) ; they then provoke 
disturbances, irritations, corrugationes in the sensitive fibers. 
Willis therefore advises us not to be surprised by certain 
analogies of symptoms: certainly, we have seen convulsions 
produce pains as if the violent movement of hysteria could 
provoke the sufferings of hypochondria. But the resemblances 
are deceptive. “The substance is not the same, but a little 
different.” 

But beneath these fixed distinctions of the nosographers, a 
slow labor was being performed which tended increasingly to 
identify hysteria and hypochondria, as two forms of one and the 
same disease. In 1725 Richard Blackmore published a Treatise oj 
the Spleen and Vapours , or Hypochondriacal and Hysterical 
Affections', in it the two illnesses were defined as two varieties of a 
single affection—either a “morbific constitution of the spirits” or 
a “disposition to leave their reservoirs and to consume 
themselves.” For Whytt, in the middle of the eighteenth century, 
the identification was complete; the system of symptoms is 
henceforth identical: “An extraordinary sensation of cold and 
heat, of pains in several parts of the body; syncopes and vaporous 
convulsions; catalepsy and tetanus; gas in the stomach and 
intestines; an insatiable appetite for food; vomiting of black 
matter; a sudden and abundant flow of clear, pale urine; marasma 
or nervous atrophy; nervous cough; palpitations of the heart; 
variations in the pulse; periodic headaches; vertigo and dizzy 
spells; diminution and failure of eyesight; depression, despair, 
melancholia or even madness; nightmares or incubi.” 

Moreover, during the classical period hysteria and 
hypochondria slowly joined the domain of mental diseases. 
Richard Mead could still write apropos of hypochondria: “It is an 
illness of the whole body.” And we must restore its true value to 
Willis’s text on hysteria: “Among the diseases of women, 
hysterical affection is of such bad repute that like the semi- 
