dark rage, the sterile madness that lie in men’s hearts. 

At the opposite pole to this nature of shadows, madness 
fascinates because it is knowledge. It is knowledge, first, because 
all these absurd figures are in reality elements of a difficult, 
hermetic, esoteric learning. These strange forms are situated, 
from the first, in the space of the Great Secret, and the Saint 
Anthony who is tempted by them is not a victim of the violence 
of desire but of the much more insidious lure of curiosity; he is 
tempted by that distant and intimate knowledge which is 
offered, and at the same time evaded, by the smile of the gryllos; 
his backward movement is nothing but that step by which he 
keeps from crossing the forbidden limits of knowledge; he knows 


32 



already—and that is his temptation—what Jerome Cardan will 
say later: “Wisdom, like other precious substances, must be torn 
from the bowels of the earth.” This knowledge, so inaccessible, 
so formidable, the Fool, in his innocent idiocy, already possesses. 
While the man of reason and wisdom perceives only fragmentary 
and all the more unnerving images of it, the Fool bears it intact 
as an unbroken sphere: that crystal ball which for all others is 
empty is in his eyes filled with the density of an invisible 
knowledge. Brueghel mocks the sick man who tries to penetrate 
this crystal sphere, but it is this iridescent bubble of knowledge— 
an absurd but infinitely precious lantern—that sways at the end 
of the stick Dulle Griet bears on her shoulder. And it is this 
sphere which figures on the reverse of the Garden of Delights. 
Another symbol of knowledge, the tree (the forbidden tree, the 
tree of promised immortality and of sin), once planted in the 
heart of the earthly paradise, has been uprooted and now forms 
the mast of the Ship of Fools, as seen in the engraving that 
illustrates Josse Bade’s Stultiferae naviculae ; it is this tree, without 
a doubt, that sways over Bosch’s Ship of Fools. 

What does it presage, this wisdom of fools? Doubtless, since it 
is a forbidden wisdom, it presages both the reign of Satan and 
the end of the world; ultimate bliss and supreme punishment; 
omnipotence on earth and the infernal fall. The Ship of Fools 
sails through a landscape of delights, where all is offered to 
desire, a sort of renewed paradise, since here man no longer 
knows either suffering or need; and yet he has not recovered his 
innocence. This false happiness is the diabolical triumph of the 
Antichrist; it is the End, already at hand. Apocalyptic dreams are 
not new, it is true, in the fifteenth century; they are, however, 
very different in nature from what they had been earlier. The 
delicately fantastic iconography of the fourteenth century, where 
castles are toppled like dice, where the Beast is always the 
traditional dragon held at bay by the Virgin, in short where the 
order of God and its imminent victory are always apparent, gives 


33 



way to a vision of the world where all wisdom is annihilated. 
This is the great witches’ Sabbath of nature: mountains melt and 
become plains, the earth vomits up the dead and bones tumble 
out of tombs; the stars fall, the earth catches fire, all life withers 
and comes to death. The end has no value as passage and 
promise; it is the advent of a night in which the world’s old 
reason is engulfed. It is enough to look at Diirer’s Horsemen of 
the Apocalypse, sent by God Himself: these are no angels of 
triumph and reconciliation; these are no heralds of serene justice, 
but the disheveled warriors of a mad vengeance. The world sinks 
into universal Fury. Victory is neither God’s nor the Devil’s: it 
belongs to Madness. 

On all sides, madness fascinates man. The fantastic images it 
generates are not fleeting appearances that quickly disappear 
from the surface of things. By a strange paradox, what is born 
from the strangest delirium was already hidden, like a secret, like 
an inaccessible truth, in the bowels of the earth. When man 
deploys the arbitrary nature of his madness, he confronts the 
dark necessity of the world; the animal that haunts his 
nightmares and his nights of privation is his own nature, which 
will lay bare hell’s pitiless truth; the vain images of blind idiocy— 
such are the world’s Magna Sciential and already, in this disorder, 
in this mad universe, is prefigured what will be the cruelty of the 
finale. In such images—and this is doubtless what gives them 
their weight, what imposes such great coherence on their fantasy 
—the Renaissance has expressed what it apprehended of the 
threats and secrets of the world. 

During the same period, the literary, philosophical, and moral 
themes of madness are in an altogether different vein. 

The Middle Ages had given madness, or folly, a place in the 
hierarchy of vices. Beginning with the thirteenth century, it is 
customarily ranked among the wicked soldiers of the 
psychomachy. It figures, at Paris as at Amiens, among the evil 


34 

