
91 


long road of the Passion, which was also the road of the passions, 
of wisdom forgotten, and of madness. And because it was one of 
the forms of the Passion—the ultimate form, in a sense, before 
death—madness would now become, for those who suffered it, 
an object of respect and compassion. 

To respect madness is not to interpret it as the involuntary and 
inevitable accident of disease, but to recognize this lower limit of 
human truth, a limit not accidental but essential. As death is the 
limit of human life in the realm of time, madness is its limit in 
the realm of animality, and just as death had been sanctified by 
the death of Christ, madness, in its most bestial nature, had also 
been sanctified. On March 29, 1654, Saint Vincent de Paul 
announced to Jean Barreau, himself a congreganist, that his 
brother had just been confined at Saint-Lazare as a lunatic: “We 
must honor Our Lord in the state wherein He was when they 
sought to bind Him, saying quoniam in frenesim versus est , in 
order to sanctify that state in those whom His Divine Providence 
has placed there.”! 1 Madness is the lowest point of humanity to 
which God submitted in His incarnation, thereby showing that 
there was nothing inhuman in man that could not be redeemed 
and saved; the ultimate point of the Fall was glorified by the 
divine presence: and it is this lesson which, for the seventeenth 
century, all madness still taught. 

We see why the scandal of madness could be exalted, while 
that of the other forms of unreason was concealed with so much 
care. The scandal of unreason produced only the contagious 
example of transgression and immorality; the scandal of madness 
showed men how close to animality their Fall could bring them; 
and at the same time how far divine mercy could extend when it 
consented to save man. For Renaissance Christianity, the entire 
instructive value of unreason and of its scandals lay in the 
madness of the Incarnation of God in man. For classicism, the 
Incarnation is no longer madness; but what is madness is this 


92 


incarnation of man in the beast, which is, as the ultimate point of 
his Fall, the most manifest sign of his guilt; and, as the ultimate 
object of divine mercy, the symbol of universal forgiveness and 
innocence regained. Henceforth, all the lessons of madness and 
the power of its instruction must be sought in this obscure 
region, at the lower confines of humanity, where man is hinged 
to nature, where he is both ultimate downfall and absolute 
innocence. Does not the Church’s solicitude for the insane 
during the classical period, as it is symbolized in Saint Vincent 
de Paul and his Congregation, or in the Brothers of Charity, all 
those religious orders hovering over madness and showing it to 
the world—does this not indicate that the Church found in 
madness a difficult but an essential lesson: the guilty innocence 
of the animal in man? This is the lesson to be read and 
understood in its spectacles, in which it exalted in the madman 
the fury of the human beast. Paradoxically, this Christian 
consciousness of animality prepared the moment when madness 
would be treated as a fact of nature; it would then be quickly 
forgotten what this “nature” meant for classical thought: not the 
always accessible domain of an objective analysis, but that region 
in which there appears, for man, the always possible scandal of a 
madness that is both his ultimate truth and the form of his 
abolition. 

All these phenomena, these strange practices woven around 
madness, these usages which glorify and at the same time 
discipline it, reduce it to animality while making it teach the 
lesson of the Redemption, put madness in a strange position 
with regard to unreason as a whole. In the houses of 
confinement, madness cohabits with all the forms of unreason 
which envelop it and define its most general truth; and yet 
madness is isolated, treated in a special manner, manifested in its 
singularity as if, though belonging to unreason, it nonetheless 
traversed that domain by a movement peculiar to itself, 


93 



ceaselessly referring from itself to its most paradoxical extreme. 

We have now got in the habit of perceiving in madness a fall 
into a determinism where all forms of liberty are gradually 
suppressed; madness shows us nothing more than the natural 
constants of a determinism, with the sequences of its causes, and 
the discursive movement of its forms; for madness threatens 
modern man only with that return to the bleak world of beasts 
and things, to their fettered freedom. It is not on this horizon of 
nature that the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries recognized 
madness, but against a background of Unreason', madness did not 
disclose a mechanism, but revealed a liberty raging in the 
monstrous forms of animality. We no longer understand 
unreason today, except in its epithetic form: the Unreasonable , a 
sign attached to conduct or speech, and betraying to the layman’s 
eyes the presence of madness and all its pathological train; for us 
