rigor and in its totality; but it is fissured, it turns out, along lines 
which do not abolish it, but divide it into arbitrary sectors. For 
when melancholia fixes upon an aberrant idea, it is not only the 
soul which is involved; it is the soul with the brain, the soul with 
the nerves, their origin and their fibers: a whole segment of the 
unity of soul and body is thus detached from the aggregate and 
especially from the organs by which reality is perceived. The 


102 


same thing occurs in convulsions and agitation: the soul is not 
excluded from the body, but is swept along so rapidly by it that it 
cannot retain all its conceptions; it is separated from its 
memories, its intentions, its firmest ideas, and thus isolated from 
itself and from all that remains stable in the body, it surrenders 
itself to the most mobile fibers; nothing in its behavior is 
henceforth adapted to reality, to truth, or to prudence; though 
the fibers in their vibration may imitate what is happening in the 
perceptions, the sufferer cannot tell the difference: “The rapid 
and chaotic pulsations of the arteries, or whatever other 
derangement occurs, imprints this same movement on the fibers 
(as in perception); they will represent as present objects which 
are not so, as true those which are chimerical.”? 

In madness, the totality of soul and body is parceled out: not 
according to the elements which constitute that totality 
metaphysically; but according to figures, images which envelop 
segments of the body and ideas of the soul in a kind of absurd 
unity. Fragments which isolate man from himself, but above all 
from reality; fragments which, by detaching themselves, have 
formed the unreal unity of a hallucination, and by very virtue of 
this autonomy impose it upon truth. “Madness is no more than 

the derangement of the imagination.”^ In other words, 
beginning with passion, madness is still only an intense 
movement in the rational unity of soul and body; this is the level 
of unreason ; but this intense movement quickly escapes the 
reason of the mechanism and becomes, in its violences, its 
stupors, its senseless propagations, an irrational movement; and 
it is then that, escaping truth and its constraints, the Unreal 
appears. 

And thereby we find the suggestion of the third cycle we must 
now trace: that of chimeras, of hallucinations, and of error—the 
cycle of non-being. 


103 


Let us listen to what is said in these fantastic fragments. 

Imagination is not madness. Even if in the arbitrariness of 
hallucination, alienation finds the first access to its vain liberty, 
madness begins only beyond this point, when the mind binds 
itself to this arbitrariness and becomes a prisoner of this apparent 
liberty. At the moment he wakes from a dream, a man can 
indeed observe: “I am imagining that I am dead”: he thereby 
denounces and measures the arbitrariness of the imagination—he 
is not mad. He is mad when he posits as an affirmation of his 
death—when he suggests as having some value as truth—the 
still-neutral content of the image “I am dead.” And just as the 
consciousness of truth is not carried away by the mere presence 
of the image, but in the act which limits, confronts, unifies, or 
dissociates the image, so madness will begin only in the act 
which gives the value of truth to the image. There is an original 
innocence of the imagination: “The imagination itself does not 
err, since it neither denies nor affirms but is fixed to so great a 
degree on the simple contemplation of an image”;9 and only the 
mind can turn what is given in the image into abusive truth, in 
other words, into error, or acknowledged error, that is, into 
truth: “A drunk man thinks he sees two candles where there is 
but one; a man who has a strabismus and whose mind is 
cultivated immediately acknowledges his error and accustoms 
himself to see but one.”10 Madness is thus beyond imagination, 
and yet it is profoundly rooted in it; for it consists merely in 
allowing the image a spontaneous value, total and absolute truth. 
The act of the reasonable man who, rightly or wrongly, judges an 
image to be true or false, is beyond this image, transcends and 
measures it by what is not itself; the act of the madman never 
oversteps the image presented, but surrenders to its immediacy, 
and affirms it only insofar is it is enveloped by it: “Many persons, 
not to say all, succumb to madness only from being too 
concerned about an object.” Inside the image, confiscated by 


104 


it, and incapable of escaping from it, madness is nonetheless 
more than imagination, forming an act of undetermined content. 

What is this act? An act of faith, an act of affirmation and of 
negation—a discourse which sustains and at the same time 
erodes the image, undermines it, distends it in the course of a 
reasoning, and organizes it around a segment of language. The 
man who imagines he is made of glass is not mad, for any sleeper 
can have this image in a dream; but he is mad if, believing he is 
