to society, but because he had again subscribed to the great 
ethical pact of human existence. In April 1684, a decree created 
within the Hopital a section for boys and girls under twenty-five; 
it specified that work must occupy the greater part of the day, 
and must be accompanied by “the reading of pious books.” But 
the ruling defines the purely repressive nature of this work, 
beyond any concern for production: “They will be made to work 
as long and as hard as their strengths and situations will permit.” 
It is then, but only then, that they can be taught an occupation 
“fitting their sex and inclination,” insofar as the measure of their 
zeal in the first activities makes it possible to “judge that they 
desire to reform.” Finally, every fault “will be punished by 
reduction of gruel, by increase of work, by imprisonment and 
other punishments customary in the said hospitals, as the 


70 


directors shall see fit.” It is enough to read the “general 
regulations for daily life in the House of Saint-Louis de la 
Salpetriere” to understand that the very requirement of labor was 
instituted as an exercise in moral reform and constraint, which 
reveals, if not the ultimate meaning, at least the essential 
justification of confinement. 

An important phenomenon, this invention of a site of 
constraint, where morality castigates by means of administrative 
enforcement. For the first time, institutions of morality are 
established in which an astonishing synthesis of moral obligation 
and civil law is effected. The law of nations will no longer 
countenance the disorder of hearts. To be sure, this is not the 
first time in European culture that moral error, even in its most 
private form, has assumed the aspect of a transgression against 
the written or unwritten laws of the community. But in this great 
confinement of the classical age, the essential thing—and the 
new event—is that men were confined in cities of pure morality, 
where the law that should reign in all hearts was to be applied 
without compromise, without concession, in the rigorous forms 
of physical constraint. Morality permitted itself to be 
administered like trade or economy. 

Thus we see inscribed in the institutions of absolute monarchy 
—in the very ones that long remained the symbol of its arbitrary 
power—the great bourgeois, and soon republican, idea that 
virtue, too, is an affair of state, that decrees can be published to 
make it flourish, that an authority can be established to make 
sure it is respected. The walls of confinement actually enclose the 
negative of that moral city of which the bourgeois conscience 
began to dream in the seventeenth century; a moral city for those 
who sought, from the start, to avoid it, a city where right reigns 
only by virtue of a force without appeal—a sort of sovereignty of 
good, in which intimidation alone prevails and the only 
recompense of virtue (to this degree its own reward) is to escape 
punishment. In the shadows of the bourgeois city is born this 


71 



strange republic of the good which is imposed by force on all 
those suspected of belonging to evil. This is the underside of the 
bourgeoisie’s great dream and great preoccupation in the classical 
age: the laws of the State and the laws of the heart at last 
identical. “Let our politicians leave off their calculations ... let 
them learn once and for all that everything can be had for 
money, except morals and citizens.”9 

Is this not the dream that seems to have haunted the founders 
of the house of confinement in Hamburg? One of the directors is 
to see that “all in the house are properly instructed as to religious 
and moral duties.... The schoolmaster must instruct the children 
in religion, and encourage them, at proper times, to learn and 
repeat portions of Scripture. He must also teach them reading, 
writing and accounts, and a decent behaviour to those that visit 
the house. He must take care that they attend divine service, and 

are orderly at it.” In England, the workhouse regulations 
devote much space to the surveillance of morals and to religious 
education. Thus for the house in Plymouth, a schoolmaster is to 
be appointed who will fulfill the triple requirement of being 
“pious, sober, and discreet.” Every morning and evening, at the 
prescribed hour, it will be his task to preside at prayers; every 
Saturday afternoon and on holidays, he will address the inmates, 
exhorting and instructing them in “the fundamental parts of the 
Protestant religion, according to the doctrine of the Church of 
England.” Hamburg or Plymouth, Zuchthausern and workhouses 
—throughout Protestant Europe, fortresses of moral order were 
constructed, in which were taught religion and whatever was 
necessary to the peace of the State. 

In Catholic countries, the goal is the same but the religious 
imprint is a little more marked, as the work of Saint Vincent de 
Paul bears witness. “The principal end for which such persons 
have been removed here, out of the storms of the great world, 
and introduced into this solitude as pensioners, is entirely to 


72 
