In the domain of literary and philosophic expression, the 
experience of madness in the fifteenth century generally takes the 
form of moral satire. Nothing suggests those great threats of 
invasion that haunted the imagination of the painters. On the 
contrary, great pains are taken to ward it off; one does not speak 
of such things. Erasmus turns our gaze from that insanity “which 
the Furies let slip from hell, each time they release their 
serpents”; it is not these insane forms that he has chosen to 
praise, but the “sweet illusion” that frees the soul from “its 
painful cares and returns it to the various forms of sensuality.” 
This calm world is easily mastered; it readily yields its naive 
mysteries to the eyes of the wise man, and the latter, by laughter, 
always keeps his distance. Whereas Bosch, Brueghel, and Diirer 
were terribly earth-bound spectators, implicated in that madness 
they saw surging around them, Erasmus observes it from far 


38 



enough away to be out of danger; he observes it from the heights 
of his Olympus, and if he sings its praises, it is because he can 
laugh at it with the inextinguishable laughter of the Gods. For 
the madness of men is a divine spectacle: “In fact, could one 
make observations from the Moon, as did Menippus, 
considering the numberless agitations of the Earth, one would 
think one saw a swarm of flies or gnats fighting among 
themselves, struggling and laying traps, stealing from one 
another, playing, gamboling, falling, and dying, and one would 
not believe the troubles, the tragedies that were produced by such 
a minute animalcule destined to perish so shortly.” Madness is 
no longer the familiar foreignness of the world; it is merely a 
commonplace spectacle for the foreign spectator; no longer a 
figure of the cosmos , but a characteristic of the aevum. 

But a new enterprise was being undertaken that would abolish 
the tragic experience of madness in a critical consciousness. Let 
us ignore this phenomenon for the moment and consider 
indiscriminately those figures to be found in Don Quixote as well 
as in Scudery’s novels, in King Lear as well as in the theater of 
Jean de Rotrou or Tristan fHermite. 

Let us begin with the most important, and the most durable— 
since the eighteenth century will still recognize its only just 
erased forms: madness by romantic identification. Its features have 
been fixed once and for all by Cervantes. But the theme is 
tirelessly repeated: direct adaptations (the Don Quichotte of 
Guerin de Bouscal was performed in 1639; two years later, he 
staged Le Gouvernement de Rancho Pan$a), reinterpretations of a 
