compromised, perverted, distorted—thereby manifesting such 
unity as evident and established, but also as fragile and already 
doomed to destruction. 

There comes a moment in the course of passion when laws are 
suspended as though of their own accord, when movement either 
abruptly stops, without collision or absorption of any kind of 
active force, or is propagated, the action ceasing only at the 
climax of the paroxysm. Whytt admits that an intense emotion 
can provoke madness exactly as impact can provoke movement, 
for the sole reason that emotion is both impact in the soul and 
agitation of the nervous fiber: “It is thus that sad narratives or 
those capable of moving the heart, a horrible and unexpected 
sight, great grief, rage, terror, and the other passions which make 
a great impression frequently occasion the most sudden and 
violent nervous symptoms.” But—it is here that madness, strictly 
speaking, begins—it happens that this movement immediately 
cancels itself out by its own excess and abruptly provokes an 
immobility which may reach the point of death itself. As if in the 
mechanics of madness, repose were not necessarily a quiescent 
thing but could also be a movement in violent opposition to 
itself, a movement which under the effect of its own violence 
abruptly achieves contradiction and the impossibility of 
continuance. “It is not unheard of that the passions, being very 
violent, generate a kind of tetanus or catalepsy such that the 
person then resembles a statue more than a living being. Further, 
fear, affliction, joy, and shame carried to their excess have more 


100 



than once been followed by sudden death. 

Conversely, it happens that movement, passing from soul to 
body and from body to soul, propagates itself indefinitely in a 
locus of anxiety certainly closer to that space where Malebranche 
placed souls than to that in which Descartes situated bodies. 
Imperceptible movements, often provoked by a slight external 
impact, accumulate, are amplified, and end by exploding in 
violent convulsions. Giovanni Maria Lancisi had already 
explained that the noble Romans were often subject to the vapors 
—hysterical attacks, hypochondriacal fits—because in their court 
life “their minds, continually agitated between fear and hope, 
never knew a moment’s repose.” According to many physicians, 
city life, the life of the court, of the salons, led to madness by this 
multiplicity of excitations constantly accumulated, prolonged, 
and echoed without ever being attenuated. But there is in this 
image, in its more intense forms, and in the events constituting 
its organic version, a certain force which, increasing, can lead to 
delirium, as if movement, instead of losing its strength in 
communicating itself, could involve other forces in its wake, and 
from them derive an additional vigor. This was how Sauvages 
explained the origin of madness: a certain impression of fear is 
linked to the congestion or the pressure of a certain medullary 
fiber; this fear is limited to an object, as this congestion is strictly 
localized. In proportion as this fear persists, the soul grants it 
more attention, increasingly isolating and detaching it from all 
else. But such isolation reinforces the fear, and the soul, having 
accorded it too special a condition, gradually tends to attach to it 
a whole series of more or less remote ideas: “It joins to this 
simple idea all those which are likely to nourish and augment it. 
For example, a man who supposes in his sleep that he is being 
accused of a crime, immediately associates this idea with that of 
its satellites—judges, executioners, the gibbet.” And from being 
thus burdened with all these new elements, involving them in its 


101 


course, the idea assumes a kind of additional power which 
ultimately renders it irresistible even to the most concerted 
efforts of the will. 

Madness, which finds its first possibility in the phenomenon 
of passion, and in the deployment of that double causality which, 
starting from passion itself, radiates both toward the body and 
toward the soul, is at the same time suspension of passion, 
breach of causality, dissolution of the elements of this unity. 
Madness participates both in the necessity of passion and in the 
anarchy of what, released by this very passion, transcends it and 
ultimately contests all it implies. Madness ends by being a 
movement of the nerves and muscles so violent that nothing in 
the course of images, ideas, or wills seems to correspond to it: 
this is the case of mania when it is suddenly intensified into 
convulsions, or when it degenerates into continuous frenzy. 
Conversely, madness can, in the body’s repose or inertia, 
generate and then maintain an agitation of the soul, without 
pause or pacification, as is the case in melancholia, where 
external objects do not produce the same impression on the 
sufferer s mind as on that of a healthy man; “his impressions are 
weak and he rarely pays attention to them; his mind is almost 
totally absorbed by the vivacity of certain ideas.”6 

Indeed this dissociation between the external movements of 
the body and the course of ideas does not mean that the unity of 
body and soul is necessarily dissolved, nor that each recovers its 
autonomy in madness. Doubtless the unity is compromised in its 
