nerves”; the other shifted their meaning and their traditional 
pathological basis—sufficiently indicated by their names—and 
tended to integrate them gradually into the domain of diseases of 
the mind, beside mania and melancholia. But this integration 
was not achieved, as in the case of mania and melancholia, on 
the level of primitive qualities, perceived and imagined in their 
iconographic values. We are dealing here with an entirely 
different type of integration. 

The physicians of the classical period certainly tried to 
discover the qualities peculiar to hysteria and hypochondria. But 
they never reached the point of perceiving that particular 
coherence, that qualitative cohesion which gave mania and 
melancholia their unique contour. All qualities were 
contradictorily invoked, each annulling the others, leaving 
untouched the problem of what was the ultimate nature of these 
two diseases. 

Often hysteria was perceived as the effect of an internal heat 
that spread throughout the entire body, an effervescence, an 
ebullition ceaselessly manifested in convulsions and spasms. Was 
this heat not related to the amorous ardor with which hysteria 
was so often linked, in girls looking for husbands and in young 
widows who had lost theirs? Hysteria was ardent, by nature; its 
symptoms referred more easily to an image than to an illness; 
that image was drawn by Jacques Ferrand, at the beginning of 
the seventeenth century, in all its material precision. In his 
Maladie d'amour ou melancholie erotique , he declared that women 
were more often distracted by love than men; but with what art 
they could dissimulate it! “In which their mien is similar to 
alembics featly resting upon cylinders, without one’s being able 
to see the fire from without, yet if one looks beneath the alembic, 


150 



and places one’s hand upon a woman’s heart, one will find in 
both places a fiery furnace.” An admirable image, in its symbolic 
weight, its affective overtones, and the referential play of its 
imagery. Long after Ferrand, one finds the qualifying theme of 
humid heat used to characterize the secret distillations of hysteria 
and of hypochondria; but the image yielded to a more abstract 
motif. Already in Nicolas Chesneau, the flame of the feminine 
alembic had grown quite colorless: “I say that the hysterical 
affection is not a simple one, but that we understand by this 
name several diseases caused by a malign vapor which arises in 
some way or other, is corrupted, and undergoes an extraordinary 
effervescence.” For others, on the contrary, the heat rising from 
