revulsive, and draw harmful humors and liquids to the surface. It 
is curious but quite characteristic of the therapeutic thinking of 
this period that no contradiction was admitted between these 
two modes of action. Given what it is by nature —detersive and 
revulsive—vinegar would act in any situation according to this 
double determination, even though one of these two modes of 
action can no longer be analyzed in a rational and discursive 
fashion. It functions, then, directly, without intermediary, 
through the simple contact of two natural elements. Hence it is 
recommended to rub the head, shaved if possible, with vinegar. 
The Gazette de medecine cites the case of an empiric who 
managed to cure “a quantity of madmen by a very swift and very 
simple means. Here is his secret. After he has purged them above 
and below, he has them soak their head and hands in vinegar, 
and leaves them in this situation until they fall asleep, or rather 
until they wake up, and most of them are cured upon waking. He 
also applies to the patient’s shaved head chopped leaves of 


177 



Dipsacus, or fuller s weed.” 

3. Immersion. Here two themes intersect: the theme of 
ablution, with all that relates it to the rites of purity and rebirth; 
and the much more physiological theme of impregnation or 
immersion, which modifies the essential qualities of liquids and 
solids. Despite their different origin, and the gap between their 
levels of conceptual elaboration, they form, up to the end of the 
eighteenth century, a unity coherent enough so that their 
opposition is not experienced as such. The idea of nature, with 
its ambiguities, serves as their element of cohesion. Water, the 
simple and primitive liquid, belongs to all that is purest in 
nature; all the dubious modifications man has been able to add to 
nature’s essential kindness cannot change the beneficence of 
water; when civilization, life in society, the imaginary desires 
aroused by novel reading and theatergoing provoke nervous 
ailments, the return to water’s limpidity assumes the meaning of 
a ritual of purification; in that transparent coolness, one is reborn 
to one’s first innocence. But at the same time, the water naturally 
inherent in the composition of all bodies restores each to its own 
equilibrium; water serves as a universal physiological regulator. 
All these themes were expressed by Tissot, a disciple of 
Rousseau, whose imagination was as moral as it was medical: 
“Nature has prescribed water as the unique beverage of all 
nations; she gave it the power to dissolve all sorts of 
nourishment; it is agreeable to the palate; choose therefore a 
good cold water, fresh and light; it fortifies and cleans the 
bowels; the Greeks and Romans regarded it as a universal 
remedy.” 

The practice of immersion reaches far back into the history of 
madness; the baths taken at Epidaurus alone would bear witness 
to this; and cold applications of all kinds must have been current 
throughout antiquity, since Soranus of Ephesus, if we are to 
believe Caelius Aurelianus, already protested against their abuse. 
In the Middle Ages, the traditional treatment of a maniac was to 


178 



plunge him several times into water “until he had lost his 
strength and forgotten his fury.” Franciscus Sylvius recommends 
immersions in cases of melancholia or frenzy. And the story, 
accepted in the eighteenth century, of Van Helmonfs sudden 
discovery of the usefulness of hydrotherapy, was actually a 
reinterpretation. According to Menuret, this invention, 
supposedly dating from the middle of the seventeenth century, 
was the fortunate result of chance: a heavily chained madman 
was being transported on an open wagon; he managed, however, 
to free himself from his chains and jumped into a lake, tried to 
swim, fainted; when he was rescued, everyone thought he was 
dead, but he quickly recovered his spirits, which were abruptly 
restored to their natural order, and he “lived a long time without 
experiencing any further attack of madness.” This anecdote 
supposedly enlightened Van Helmont, who began to plunge the 
insane indiscriminately into the sea or into fresh water; “the only 
care that must be taken, is to plunge the sufferers into the water 
suddenly and unawares, and to keep them there for a long time. 
One need have no fear for their lives.” 

The truth of the story is of little importance; one thing is 
certain, which it conveys in the form of an anecdote: from the 
end of the seventeenth century, the water cure takes or regains its 
place as a major therapeutics of madness. When Doublet 
published his Instructions shortly before the Revolution, he 
prescribed, for the four major pathological forms he recognized 
(frenzy, mania, melancholia, imbecility), the regular use of baths, 
adding the use of cold showers for the first two. And at this 
period, Cheyne had already long since recommended that “all 
those who need to fortify their temperament” install baths in 
their house, and use them every two, three, or four days; or “if 
they have not the means, to bathe in some manner either in a 
lake or in running water, whenever they have occasion.” 

The advantages of water are evident, to a medicine dominated 
