Even cases of frenzy were cited as having been cured by music. 
Now, such observations were never meant to suggest 
psychological interpretations. If music cured, it was by acting 
upon the entire human being, by penetrating the body as 
directly, as efficaciously as it did the soul: did not Diemerbroek 
know of people stricken with the plague who had been cured by 
music? Doubtless most people no longer believed, as 


189 



Giambattista della Porta still did, that music, in the material 
reality of its sounds, afforded the body the secret virtues hidden 
in the very substance of the instruments; no longer believed, as 
he did, that lymphatics were cured by “a lively air played on a 
holly flute,” or that melancholics were soothed by “a soft air 
played on a hellebore flute,” or that it was necessary to use “a 
flute made of larkspur or iris stems to cure impotent and frigid 
men.” But if music no longer transmitted the virtues sealed in 
substances, it was efficacious upon the body because of the 
qualities it imposed upon it. It even constituted the most 
rigorous of all the mechanisms of quality, since at its origin it 
was nothing but movement, whereas once it had reached the ear 
it immediately became qualitative effect. Music’s therapeutic 
value occurred because this transformation was undone in the 
body, quality there re-decomposed into movements, the pleasure 
of sensation became what it had always been: regular vibrations 
and equilibrium of tensions. Man, as unity of soul and body, 
followed the cycle of harmony in a reverse direction, 
redescending from the harmonious to the harmonic. In him, 
music was decomposed, but health restored. But there was 
another avenue, still more direct and more efficacious: by taking 
it, man no longer played the negative role of anti-instrument; he 
reacted as if he himself were the instrument: “If one were to 
consider the human body as merely an assemblage of more or 
less taut fibers, ignoring their sensibility, their life, their 
movement, one would easily conceive that music must produce 
the same effect on the fibers as it does on the strings of similar 
instruments;”! 1 an effect of resonance which has no need to 
follow the long and complex paths of auditory sensation. The 
nervous system vibrates with the music that fills the air; the 
fibers are like so many “deaf dancers” whose movement keeps 
time to a music they do not hear. And this time, it is within the 
body itself, from the nervous fiber to the soul, that the music is 


190 


recomposed, the harmonic structure of consonance restoring the 
harmonious functioning of the passions. 

The very use of passion in the therapeutics of madness must 
not be understood as a form of psychological medication. To 
employ passion against dementia is merely to attack the unity of 
soul and body at its most rigorous point, to utilize an event in the 
double system of its effects, and in the immediate 
correspondence of their meaning. To cure madness by passion 
implies that one accepts the reciprocal symbolism of soul and 
body. Fear, in the eighteenth century, was regarded as one of the 
passions most advisable to arouse in madmen. It was considered 
the natural complement of the constraints imposed upon 
maniacs and lunatics; a sort of discipline was even imagined 
which would immediately accompany and compensate every 
attack of anger in a maniac by a reaction of fear: “It is by force 
that the furies of a maniac are overcome; it is by opposing fear to 
anger that anger may be mastered. If the terror of punishment 
and public shame are associated in the mind during attacks of 
anger, one will not appear without the other; the poison and the 
antidote are inseparable.”12 But fear is efficacious not only at the 
level of the effects of the disease; it is the disease itself that fear 
attacks and suppresses. It has, in fact, the property of petrifying 
the operations of the nervous system, somehow congealing its 
too mobile fibers, controlling all their disordered movements; 
“fear being a passion that diminishes the excitation of the brain, 
it can consequently calm its excesses, and especially the irascible 
excitation of maniacs.”!3 

If the fear-anger antithesis is efficacious against manic 
irritation, it can be used inversely against the unmotivated fears 
of melancholics, hypochondriacs, and all those who have a 
lymphatic temperament. Tissot, reviving the traditional idea that 
anger is a discharge of bile, considers that it is useful for 
dissolving the phlegms amassed in the stomach and in the blood. 


191 


By subjecting the nervous fibers to a stronger tension, anger gives 
them more vigor, thus restoring their lost elasticity and 
permitting fear to disappear. The cure by passion is based on a 
constant metaphor of qualities and movements; it always implies 
that they are immediately transferable in their own modality 
from the body to the soul, and vice versa. It must be used, says 
Scheidenmantel in the treatise he devotes to this form of cure, 
“when the cure necessitates in the body changes identical to 
those which this passion produces/’ And it is in this sense that it 
