them to the severity of the punishments pronounced by the laws, 
had abandoned themselves to the excesses of libertinage, 
debauchery, and dissipation.” On the other hand, those prisoners 
were to be kept in the houses of confinement “whose minds are 
deranged and whose imbecility makes them incapable of 
conducting themselves in a world where their rages would make 
them dangerous. With respect to these, all that is necessary is to 
ascertain whether their condition is still the same, and 
unfortunately it becomes indispensable to continue their 
detention as long as it is acknowledged that their freedom is 
harmful to society, or a useless benefit to themselves.” This was 
the first stage: to reduce as much as possible the practice of 
confinement with regard to moral transgressions, family 
conflicts, the most benign aspects of libertinage, yet to leave it 
untouched in its principle, and with one of its major meanings 
intact: the internment of the mad. This is the moment when 
madness actually takes possession of confinement, while 
confinement itself is divested of its other forms of utility. 

The second stage was that of the great investigations 
prescribed by the National Assembly and by the Constituent 
Assembly, immediately following the Declaration of the Rights 
of Man: “No man may be arrested or detained except in the cases 
determined by law and according to the forms therein prescribed. 
... The law must permit only the penalties strictly and evidently 
necessary, and no one may be punished under a law established 
and promulgated subsequent to the crime.” The era of 
confinement was over. There remained only an imprisonment 
shared for the moment by condemned or presumed criminals 
and the mad. The Committee on Mendicity of the Constitutent 
Assembly designated five persons to visit the houses of 
confinement in Paris. The Duke de la Rochefoucauld-Liancourt 
presented the report (December 1789); he declared that the 


246 



presence of madmen gave the houses of correction a degrading 
aspect and was likely to reduce the inmates to a status unworthy 
of humanity; the melange tolerated there proved a great frivolity 
on the part of the authorities and the magistrates: ‘‘This 
carelessness is far from the enlightened and scrupulous pity for 
misfortune whereby it receives all possible alleviation and 
consolation in seeking to succor poverty, can one ever 
consent to appear to degrade humanity?” 

If the mad defile those with whom they have been 
imprudently confined, a special internment must be reserved for 
