eighteenth century that the insane could support the miseries of 
existence indefinitely. There was no need to protect them; they 
had no need to be covered or warmed. When, in 1811, Samuel 
Tuke visited a workhouse in the Southern Counties, he saw cells 
where the daylight passed through little barred windows that had 
been cut in the doors. All the women were entirely naked. Now 
“the temperature was extremely rigorous, and the evening of the 


85 



day before, the thermometer had indicated a cold of 18 degrees. 
One of these unfortunate women was lying on a little straw, 
without covering.” This ability of the insane to endure, like 
animals, the worst inclemencies was still a medical dogma for 
Pinel; he would always admire “the constancy and the ease with 
which certain of the insane of both sexes bear the most rigorous 
and prolonged cold. In the month of Nivose of the Year III, on 
certain days when the thermometer indicated 10, 11, and as 
many as 16 degrees below freezing, a madman in the hospital of 
Bicetre could not endure his wool blanket, and remained sitting 
on the icy floor of his cell. In the morning, one no sooner opened 
his door than he ran in his shirt into the inner court, taking ice 
and snow by the fistful, applying it to his breast and letting it 
melt with a sort of delectation.” Madness, insofar as it partook of 
animal ferocity, preserved man from the dangers of disease; it 
afforded him an invulnerability, similar to that which nature, in 
its foresight, had provided for animals. Curiously, the 
disturbance of his reason restored the madman to the immediate 
kindness of nature by a return to animality. 

This is why, at this extreme point, madness was less than ever 
linked to medicine; nor could it be linked to the domain of 
correction. Unchained animality could be mastered only by 
discipline and brutalizing. The theme of the animal-madman was 
effectively realized in the eighteenth century, in occasional 
attempts to impose a certain pedagogy on the insane. Pinel cites 
the case of a “very famous monastic establishment, in one of the 
southern regions of France,” where a violent madman would be 
given “a precise order to change”; if he refused to go to bed or to 
eat, he “was warned that obstinacy in his deviations would be 
punished on the next day with ten strokes of the bullwhip.” If, 
on the contrary, he was submissive and docile, he was allowed “to 
take his meals in the refectory, next to the disciplinarian,” but at 
the least transgression, he was instantly admonished by a “heavy 
blow of a rod across his fingers.” Thus, by the use of a curious 


