


suddenly began to manifest itself in the second half of the 
seventeenth century; it was this sensibility that suddenly isolated 
the category destined to populate the places of confinement. To 
inhabit the reaches long since abandoned by the lepers, they 
chose a group that to our eyes is strangely mixed and confused. 
But what is for us merely an undifferentiated sensibility must 
have been, for those living in the classical age, a clearly 
articulated perception. It is this mode of perception which we 
must investigate in order to discover the form of sensibility to 
madness in an epoch we are accustomed to define by the 
privileges of Reason. The act which, by tracing the locus of 
confinement, conferred upon it its power of segregation and 
provided a new homeland for madness, though it may be 
coherent and concerted, is not simple. It organizes into a 
complex unity a new sensibility to poverty and to the duties of 
assistance, new forms of reaction to the economic problems of 
unemployment and idleness, a new ethic of work, and also the 
dream of a city where moral obligation was joined to civil law, 
within the authoritarian forms of constraint. Obscurely, these 
themes are present during the construction of the cities of 
confinement and their organization. They give a meaning to this 
ritual, and explain in part the mode in which madness was 
perceived, and experienced, by the classical age. 

Confinement, that massive phenomenon, the signs of which 
are found all across eighteenth-century Europe, is a “police” 
matter. Police, in the precise sense that the classical epoch gave 
to it—that is, the totality of measures which make work possible 
and necessary for all those who could not live without it; the 
question Voltaire would soon formulate, Colbert’s 
contemporaries had already asked: “Since you have established 
yourselves as a people, have you not yet discovered the secret of 
forcing all the rich to make all the poor work? Are you still 
ignorant of the first principles of the police?” 


57 



Before having the medical meaning we give it, or that at least 
we like to suppose it has, confinement was required by 
something quite different from any concern with curing the sick. 
What made it necessary was an imperative of labor. Our 
philanthropy prefers to recognize the signs of a benevolence 
toward sickness where there is only a condemnation of idleness. 

