system of education must be applied, a new direction given to 
their ideas; they must first be subjugated, then encouraged, then 
applied to work, and this work made agreeable by attractive 
means."8 For a long time already, the law had regarded the 
insane as minors, but this was a juridical situation, abstractly 
defined by interdiction and trusteeship; it was not a concrete 
mode of relation between man and man. Minority status became 
for Tuke a style of existence to be applied to the mad, and for the 
guards a mode of sovereignty. Great emphasis was placed on the 
concept of the “family” which organized the community of the 
insane and their keepers at the Retreat. Apparently this “family” 


263 


placed the patient in a milieu both normal and natural; in reality 
it alienated him still more: the juridical minority assigned to the 
madman was intended to protect him as a subject of law; this 
ancient structure, by becoming a form of coexistence, delivered 
him entirely, as a psychological subject, to the authority and 
prestige of the man of reason, who assumed for him the concrete 
figure of an adult, in other words, both domination and 
destination. 

In the great reorganization of relations between madness and 
reason, the family, at the end of the eighteenth century, played a 
decisive part—simultaneously imaginary landscape and real social 
structure; it is from the family that Tuke starts out, and toward it 
that he progresses. Lending it the prestige of primitive values not 
yet compromised in the social, Tuke makes the family play a role 
of disalienation; it was, in his myth, the antithesis of that 
“milieu” which the eighteenth century saw as the origin of all 
madness. But he introduced it as well, in a very real way, into the 
world of the asylum, where it appears both as truth and as norm 
for all relations that may obtain between the madman and the 
man of reason. Thus minority under family tutelage, a juridical 
status in which the madman’s civil status is alienated, becomes a 
concrete situation in which his concrete liberty is alienated. The 
entire existence of madness, in the world now being prepared for 
it, was enveloped in what we may call, in anticipation, a “parental 
complex.” The prestige of patriarchy is revived around madness 
in the bourgeois family. It is this historical sedimentation which 
psychoanalysis would later bring to light, according it through a 
new myth the meaning of a destiny that supposedly marked all of 
Western culture and perhaps all civilization, whereas it had been 
slowly deposited by it and only solidified quite recently at the 
turn of this century, when madness was doubly alienated within 
the family—by the myth of a disalienation in patriarchal purity, 
and by a truly alienating situation in an asylum constituted in the 
family mode. Henceforth, and for a period of time the end of 


264 



which it is not yet possible to predict, the discourse of unreason 
will be indissociably linked with the half-real, half-imaginary 
dialectic of the Family. So that what, in their violence, it was 
once obligatory to interpret as profanations or blasphemies, it 
would henceforth be necessary to see as an incessant attack 
against the Father. Thus in the modern world, what had been 
the great, irreparable confrontation of reason and unreason 
became the secret thrust of instincts against the solidity of the 
family institution and against its most archaic symbols. 

There is an astonishing convergence of the movement of 
fundamental institutions and this evolution of madness in the 
world of confinement. The liberal economy, as we have seen, 
tended to entrust the care of the poor and the sick to the family 
rather than to the State: the family thus became the site of social 
responsibility. But if the patient can be entrusted to the family, 
he is nonetheless mad, which is too strange and inhuman. Tuke, 
precisely, reconstitutes around madness a simulated family, 
which is an institutional parody but a real psychological 
situation. Where the family is inadequate, he substitutes for it a 
fictitious family decor of signs and attitudes. But by a very 
curious intersection, the day would come when the family was 
relieved of its responsibility to care for the patient in general, 
while it kept the fictitious values that concern madness; and long 
after the diseases of the poor had again become an affair of state, 
the asylum would keep the insane in the imperative fiction of the 
family; the madman remains a minor, and for a long time reason 
will retain for him the aspect of the Father. 

Closed upon these fictitious values, the asylum was protected 
from history and from social evolution. In Tuke’s mind, the 
problem was to constitute a milieu which would imitate the 
oldest, the purest, the most natural forms of coexistence: the 
most human milieu possible, while being the least social one 
possible. In fact, he isolated the social structure of the bourgeois 
family, reconstituted it symbolically in the asylum, and set it 


265 



adrift in history. The asylum, always oriented to anachronistic 
