product of her imagination, the landscape that Dulle Griet 
moved through was marked by a whole human language. Goya s 
Monk, with that hot beast against his back, its paws on his 
shoulders and its mouth panting at his ear, remains alone: no 
secret is revealed. All that is present is the most internal, and at 
the same time the most savagely free, of forces: the power which 
hacks apart the bodies in the Gran Disparate, which breaks free 
and assaults our eyes in the Raging Madness. Beyond that point, 
the faces themselves decompose; this is no longer the madness of 
the Caprichos , which tied on masks truer than the truth of faces; 
this is a madness beneath the mask, a madness that eats away 
faces, corrodes features; there are no longer eyes or mouths, but 
glances shot from nowhere and staring at nothing (as in the 
Witches Sabbath ); or screams from black holes (as in the 
Pilgrimage of Saint Isidore). Madness has become man’s 
possibility of abolishing both man and the world—and even 


292 



those images that challenge the world and deform man. It is, far 
beyond dreams, beyond the nightmare of bestiality, the last 
recourse: the end and the beginning of everything. Not because it 
is a promise, as in German lyricism, but because it is the 
ambiguity of chaos and apocalypse: Goya s Idiot who shrieks and 
twists his shoulder to escape from the nothingness that 
imprisons him—is this the birth of the first man and his first 
movement toward liberty, or the last convulsion of the last dying 
man? 

And this madness that links and divides time, that twists the 
world into the ring of a single night, this madness so foreign to 
the experience of its contemporaries, does it not transmit—to 
those able to receive it, to Nietzsche and to Artaud—those barely 
audible voices of classical unreason, in which it was always a 
question of nothingness and night, but amplifying them now to 
shrieks and frenzy? But giving them for the first time an 
expression, a droit de cite , and a hold on Western culture which 
makes possible all contestations, as well as total contestation? But 
restoring their primitive savagery? 

Sade’s calm, patient language also gathers up the final words 
of unreason and also gives them, for the future, a remoter 
meaning. Between Goyas broken drawings and that 
uninterrupted stream of words continuing from the first volume 
of Justine to the tenth of Juliette , there is doubtless nothing in 
common except a certain movement that retraces the course of 
contemporary lyricism, drying up its sources, rediscovering the 
secret of unreason s nothingness. 

Within the chateau where Sade’s hero confines himself, 
within the convents, the forests, the dungeons where he endlessly 
pursues the agony of his victims, it seems at first glance that 
nature can act with utter freedom. There man rediscovers a truth 
he had forgotten, though it was manifest: what desire can be 
contrary to nature, since it was given to man by nature itself? 
And since it was taught by nature in the great lesson of life and 


293 



death which never stops repeating itself in the world? The 
madness of desire, insane murders, the most unreasonable 
passions—all are wisdom and reason, since they are a part of the 
order of nature. Everything that morality and religion, 
everything that a clumsy society has stifled in man, revives in the 
castle of murders. There man is finally attuned to his own 
nature; or rather, by an ethic peculiar to this strange 
confinement, man must scrupulously maintain, without 
deviation, his fidelity to nature: a strict task, a total enterprise: 
“You will know nothing unless you have known everything; if 
you are timid enough to stop with Nature, she will escape you 
forever.”! Conversely, if man has wounded or changed nature, it 
is man’s task to repair the damage through the mathematics of a 
sovereign vengeance: “Nature caused us all to be born equal; if 
fate is pleased to disturb this plan of the general law, it is our 
responsibility to correct its caprice, and to repair by our attention 
the usurpations of the stronger.”^ The slowness of revenge, like 
the insolence of desire, belongs to nature. There is nothing that 
the madness of men invents which is not either nature made 
manifest or nature restored. 

But this is only the first phase of Sade’s thought: the ironic 
justification, both rational and lyrical, the gigantic pastiche, of 
Rousseau. Beyond this demonstration-by-absurdity of the 
inanity of contemporary philosophy, beyond all its verbiage 
about man and nature, the real decisions are still to be made: 
decisions that are also breaks, in which the links between man 
and his natural being disappear. 3 The famous Society of the 
Friends of Crime, the project of a Swedish Constitution, once 
we remove their stinging references to the Social Contract and to 
the proposed constitutions for Poland or Corsica, establish 
nothing but the sovereign rigor of subjectivity in the rejection of 
all natural liberty and all natural equality: uncontrolled disposal 
of one member by the other, the unconditional exercise of 

