We see how the political critique of confinement functioned 
in the eighteenth century. Not in the direction of a liberation of 
the mad; nor can we say that it permitted a more philanthropic 
or a greater medical attention to the insane. On the contrary, it 


238 


linked madness more firmly than ever to confinement, and this 
by a double tie: one which made madness the very symbol of the 
confining power and its absurd and obsessive representative 
within the world of confinement; the other which designated 
madness as the object par excellence of all the measures of 
confinement. Subject and object, image and goal of repression, 
symbol of its blind arbitrariness and justification of all that could 
be reasonable and deserved within it: by a paradoxical circle, 
madness finally appears as the only reason for a confinement 
whose profound unreason it symbolizes. Still so close to this 
eighteenth-century notion, Michelet would formulate it with an 
astonishing rigor; he returns to the very movement of Mirabeau’s 
thought, apropos of the stay the latter made at Vincennes at the 
same time as Sade: 

First, confinement causes alienation: “Prison makes men mad. 
Those found in the Bastille and in Bicetre were stupefied.” 

Secondly, what is most unreasonable, most shameful, most 
profoundly immoral in the tyranny of the eighteenth century is 
represented in the space of confinement, and by a madman: “We 
have seen the frenzies of La Salpetriere. A dreadful lunatic 
existed at Vincennes, the poisonous de Sade, writing in the hope 
of corrupting the time to come.” 

Thirdly, it is for this one madman alone that confinement 
ought to have been reserved, and nothing of the kind was done: 
“He was soon set free, and Mirabeau kept in confinement.” 

Hence an abyss yawns in the middle of confinement; a void 
which isolates madness, denounces it for being irreducible, 
unbearable to reason; madness now appears with what 
distinguishes it from all these confined forms as well. The 
presence of the mad appears as an injustice; but for others. The 
undifferentiated unity of unreason had been broken. Madness 
was individualized, strangely twinned with crime, at least linked 
with it by a proximity which had not yet been called into 


239 

