assumes in the organs). 

But if the notion of “irritated fiber” certainly plays this role of 
concerted confusion, it also permits a decisive distinction in 
pathology. On one hand, nervous sufferers are the most irritable, 
that is, have the most sensibility: tenuousness of fiber, delicacy of 
organism; but they also have an easily impressionable soul, an 
unquiet heart, too strong a sympathy for what happens around 
them. This sort of universal resonance—simultaneously 
sensation and mobility—constitutes the first determination of 
the illness. Women who have “frail fibers,” who are easily carried 
away, in their idleness, by the lively movements of their 
imagination, are more often attacked by nervous diseases than 
men who are “more robust, drier, hardened by work.” But this 
excess of irritation has this peculiarity: that in its vivacity it 
attenuates, and sometimes ends by extinguishing, the sensations 
of the soul; as if the sensibility of the nervous organ itself 
overcharged the soul’s capacity to feel, and appropriated for its 
own advantage the multiplicity of sensations aroused by its 
extreme mobility; the nervous system “is in such a state of 
irritation and reaction that it is then incapable of transmitting to 
the soul what it is experiencing; all its figures are disordered; it 
can no longer interpret them.”21 Thus appears the idea of a 
sensibility which is not sensation, and of an inverse relation 
between that delicacy which derives as much from the soul as 
from the body, and a certain numbness of the sensations that 
prevents nervous shocks from reaching the soul. The hysteric’s 
unconsciousness is only the reverse of his sensibility. It is this 
relation, which the notion of sympathy could not define, which 
was contributed by the concept of irritability, though so little 


166 



elaborated and still so confused in the thinking of pathologists. 

But by this very fact, the moral significance of “nervous 
complaints” was profoundly altered. Insofar as diseases of the 
nerves had been associated with the organic movements of the 
lower parts of the body (even by the many and confused paths of 
sympathy), they were located within a certain ethic of desire: 
they represented the revenge of a crude body; it had been as the 
result of an excessive violence that one became ill. From now on 
one fell ill from too much feeling; one suffered from an excessive 
solidarity with all the beings around one. One was no longer 
compelled by one’s secret nature; one was the victim of 
everything which, on the surface of the world, solicited the body 
and the soul. 

And as a result, one was both more innocent and more guilty. 
More innocent, because one was swept by the total irritation of 
the nervous system into an unconsciousness great in proportion 
to one’s disease. But more guilty, much more guilty, because 
everything to which one was attached in the world, the life one 
had led, the affections one had had, the passions and the 
imaginations one had cultivated too complacently—all combined 
in the irritation of the nerves, finding there both their natural 
effect and their moral punishment. All life was finally judged by 
this degree of irritation: abuse of things that were not natural, 
the sedentary life of cities, novel reading, theatergoing, 
immoderate thirst for knowledge, “too fierce a passion for the 
sex, or that other criminal habit, as morally reprehensible as it is 
physically harmful. ”22 The innocence of the nervous sufferer, 
who no longer even feels the irritation of his nerves, is at bottom 
only the just punishment of a deeper guilt: the guilt which makes 
him prefer the world to nature: “Terrible state!... This is the 
torment of all effeminate souls whom inaction has plunged into 
dangerous sensuality, and who, to rid themselves of the labors 
imposed by nature, have embraced all the phantoms of opinion. 


167 


... Thus the rich are punished for the deplorable use of their 

fortune.”23 

We stand here on the threshold of the nineteenth century, 
where the irritability of the fibers will enjoy physiological and 
pathological fortunes. What it leaves for the moment, in the 
domain of nervous diseases, is nonetheless something very 
important. 

This is, on the one hand, the complete identification of 
hysteria and hypochondria as mental diseases. By the capital 
distinction between sensibility and sensation, they enter into that 
domain of unreason which we have seen was characterized by the 
essential moment of error and dream, that is, of blindness. As 
long as vapors were convulsions or strange sympathetic 
communications through the body, even when they led to 
fainting and loss of consciousness, they were not madness. But 
once the mind becomes blind through the very excess of 
sensibility—then madness appears. 

But on the other hand, such an identification gives madness a 
new content of guilt, of moral sanction, of just punishment 
which was not at all a part of the classical experience. It burdens 
