as a consciousness of himself, and as a non-reciprocal relation to 
the keeper; it organized it for the man of reason as an awareness 
of the Other, a therapeutic intervention in the madman’s 
existence. In other words, by this guilt the madman became an 
object of punishment always vulnerable to himself and to the 
Other; and, from the acknowledgment of his status as object, 
from the awareness of his guilt, the madman was to return to his 
awareness of himself as a free and responsible subject, and 
consequently to reason. This movement by which, objectifying 


258 



himself for the Other, the madman thus returned to his liberty, 
was to be found as much in Work as in Observation. 

Let us not forget that we are in a Quaker world where God 
blesses men in the signs of their prosperity. Work comes first in 
“moral treatment” as practiced at the Retreat. In itself, work 
possesses a constraining power superior to all forms of physical 
coercion, in that the regularity of the hours, the requirements of 
attention, the obligation to produce a result detach the sufferer 
from a liberty of mind that would be fatal and engage him in a 
system of responsibilities: “Regular employment is perhaps the 
most generally efficacious; and those kinds of employment are 
doubtless to be preferred, both on a moral and physical account, 
which are accompanied by considerable bodily action; that are 
most agreeable to the patient and which are most opposite to the 
illusions of his disease.”7 Through work, man returns to the 
order of God’s commandments; he submits his liberty to laws 
that are those of both morality and reality. Hence mental work is 
not to be rejected; yet with absolute rigor, all exercises of the 
imagination must be excluded as being in complicity with the 
passions, the desires, or all delirious illusions. On the contrary, 
the study of what is eternal in nature and most in accord with the 
wisdom and goodness of Providence has the greatest efficacity in 
reducing the madman’s immoderate liberties and bringing him to 
discover the forms of his responsibility. “The various branches of 
the mathematics and natural science furnish the most useful class 
of subjects on which to employ the minds of the insane.” In the 
asylum, work is deprived of any productive value; it is imposed 
only as a moral rule; a limitation of liberty, a submission to order, 
an engagement of responsibility, with the single aim of 
disalienating the mind lost in the excess of a liberty which 
physical constraint limits only in appearance. 

Even more efficacious than work, than the observation of 
others, is what Tuke calls “the need for esteem”: “This principle 
