this complex of convictions and images which constitutes a 
delirium. Now Diemerbroek tries to find out what are the 
“causes” of this madness, how it can have originated. And this is 
what he learns: this man had taken his son bathing and the boy 
had drowned. Hence the father considered himself responsible 
for his sons death. We can therefore reconstitute in the 
following manner the development of this madness: judging 
himself guilty, the man decides that homicide is execrable in the 
sight of God on High; whence it occurs to his imagination that 
he is eternally damned; and since he knows that the chief 
torment of damnation consists in being delivered into Satan’s 
hands, he tells himself “that a horrible demon is assigned to 
him.” This demon he does not as yet see, but since “he does not 
cease thinking of it,” and “regards this notion as necessarily true,” 
he imposes on his brain a certain image of this demon; this 
image is presented to his soul by the action of the brain and of 
the spirits with such insistence that he believes he continually 


106 



sees the demon itself.”12 

Hence madness, as analyzed by Diemerbroek, has two levels; 
one is manifest to all eyes: an unwarranted melancholia in a man 
who wrongly accuses himself of having killed his son; a depraved 
imagination which pictures demons; a dismantled reason which 
converses with a phantom. But at a deeper level, we find a 
rigorous organization dependent on the faultless armature of a 
discourse. This discourse, in its logic, commands the firmest 
belief in itself, it advances by judgments and reasonings which 
connect together; it is a kind of reason in action. In short, under 
the chaotic and manifest delirium reigns the order of a secret 
delirium. In this second delirium, which is, in a sense, pure 
reason, reason delivered of all the external tinsel of dementia, is 
located the paradoxical truth of madness. And this in a double 
sense, since we find here both what makes madness true 
(irrefutable logic, perfectly organized discourse, faultless 
connection in the transparency of a virtual language) and what 
makes it truly madness (its own nature, the special style of all its 
manifestations, and the internal structure of delirium). 

But still more profoundly, this delirious language is the 
ultimate truth of madness insofar as it is madness’s organizing 
form, the determining principle of all its manifestations, whether 
of the body or of the soul. For if Diemerbroek’s melancholic 
converses with his demon, it is because the demon’s image has 
been profoundly impressed by the movement of spirits on the 
