remote provinces, there was no question of sending the insane to 
the former hopitaux generaux. Generally, they were detained in 
the prisons, as was the case for example at the fortress of Ha, at 
the Chateau of Angers, or at Bellevaux. The disorder in such 
places was indescribable, and continued for a long time—until 
the Empire. Antoine Nodier gives some details about Bellevaux: 
“Every day, the uproar warns the neighborhood that those 


249 



confined are fighting and persecuting one another. The guards 
rush upon them. Constituted as they are today, the prison guards 
are the laughingstock of the combatants. The municipal 
administrators are implored to intervene in order to re-establish 
peace and quiet; their authority is flouted; they are shamed and 
insulted; this is no longer a house of justice and detention.” 

The disorders are as great, greater perhaps, at Bicetre; political 
prisoners are kept there; hunted suspects are hidden there; 
poverty and famine keep many people hungry. The 
administration never ceases to protest; it asks that criminals be 
kept separate; and—it is important to note—some people still 
suggest that, in their place of detention, madmen be confined as 
well. On the ninth Brumaire, Year III, the bursar of Bicetre 
writes to “Citizens Grandpre and Osmond, members of the 
Committee on Administration and Tribunals”: “I submit that at 
a moment when humanity is decidedly the order of the day, 
there is no one who does not experience an impulse of horror 
upon seeing crime and indigence united in the same asylum.” 
Was it necessary to recall the September massacres, the continual 
escapes, and, for so many innocent eyes, the sight of strangled 
prisoners, of swinging chains? The indigent and the old “have 
before their eyes nothing but chains, bars, and bolts. Add to this 
the groans of the prisoners that sometimes reach them.... It is on 
this basis that I urgently ask either that the prisoners be removed 
from Bicetre, leaving only the indigent there, or that the indigent 
be removed, leaving only the prisoners.” And here, finally, is the 
decisive point, if we remember that this letter was written in the 
middle of the Revolution, long before the reports of Georges 
Cabanis, and several months after Pinel, according to tradition, 
had “liberated” the insane of Bicetre: “We could perhaps in this 
latter case leave the madmen there, another class of unfortunates 
who cause horrible suffering to humanity.... Make haste, then, 
citizens who cherish humanity, to realize such a beautiful dream, 
and be persuaded in advance that you will thereupon have 


250 



deserved well of it.” So great was the confusion of those years; so 
difficult was it, at the moment when “humanity” was being re¬ 
evaluated, to determine the place madness was to occupy within 
it; so difficult was it to situate madness in a social sphere that was 
being restructured. 


251 



IX 



252 


THE BIRTH OF 
THE ASYLUM 


WE know the images. They are familiar in all histories of 
psychiatry, where their function is to illustrate that happy age 
when madness was finally recognized and treated according to a 
truth to which we had too long remained blind. 

“The worthy Society of Friends ... sought to assure those of 
its members who might have the misfortune to lose their reason 
without a sufficient fortune to resort to expensive establishments 
all the resources of medicine and all the comforts of life 
compatible with their state; a voluntary subscription furnished 
the funds, and for the last two years, an establishment that seems 
to unite many advantages with all possible economy has been 
founded near the city of York. If the soul momentarily quails at 
the sight of that dread disease which seems created to humiliate 
human reason, it subsequently experiences gentler emotions 
when it considers all that an ingenious benevolence has been able 
to invent for its care and cure. 

“This house is situated a mile from York, in the midst of a 
fertile and smiling countryside; it is not at all the idea of a prison 
that it suggests, but rather that of a large farm; it is surrounded 
by a great, walled garden. No bars, no grilles on the windows.”1 

As for the liberation of the insane at Bicetre, the story is 
