humiliation. The great cosmic conflict whose peripities had been 
revealed by the Insane in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, 
shifted until it became, at the end of the classical period, a 
dialectic lacking the heart’s mediation. Sadism is not a name 
finally given to a practice as old as Eros; it is a massive cultural 
fact which appeared precisely at the end of the eighteenth 
century, and which constitutes one of the greatest conversions of 
Western imagination: unreason transformed into delirium of the 
heart, madness of desire, the insane dialogue of love and death in 
the limitless presumption of appetite. Sadism appears at the very 
moment that unreason, confined for over a century and reduced 
to silence, reappears, no longer as an image of the world, no 
longer as a figura , but as language and desire. And it is no 
accident that sadism, as an individual phenomenon bearing the 
name of a man, was born of confinement and, within 
confinement, that Sade’s entire oeuvre is dominated by the 
images of the Fortress, the Cell, the Cellar, the Convent, the 
inaccessible Island which thus form, as it were, the natural 
habitat of unreason. It is no accident, either, that all the fantastic 
literature of madness and horror, which is contemporary with 
Sade’s oeuvre , takes place, preferentially, in the strongholds of 
confinement. And this whole sudden conversion of Western 
memory at the end of the eighteenth century, with its possibility 
of rediscovering—deformed and endowed with a new meaning— 
figures familiar at the end of the Middle Ages: was this 
conversion not authorized by the survival and the reawakening of 
the fantastic in the very places where unreason had been reduced 


221 



to silence? 


In the classical period, the awareness of madness and the 
awareness of unreason had not separated from one another. The 
experience of unreason that had guided all the practices of 
confinement so enveloped the awareness of madness that it very 
nearly permitted it to disappear, sweeping it along a road of 
regression where it was close to losing its most specific elements. 

But in the anxiety of the second half of the eighteenth century, 
the fear of madness grew at the same time as the dread of 
unreason: and thereby the two forms of obsession, leaning upon 
each other, continued to reinforce each other. And at the very 
moment we note the liberation of the iconographic powers that 
accompany unreason, we hear on all sides complaints about the 
ravages of madness. Already we are familiar with the concern 
generated by “nervous diseases,” and the awareness that man 
becomes more delicate in proportion as he perfects himself. As 
the century advanced, the concern became more pressing, the 
warnings more solemn. Already Raulin had observed that “since 
the birth of medicine ... these illnesses have multiplied, have 
become more dangerous, more complicated, more problematical 
and difficult to cure.” By Tissof s time, this general impression 
became a firm belief, a sort of medical dogma: nervous diseases 
“were formerly much less frequent than they are nowadays; and 
this for two reasons: one, that men were in general more robust, 
and less frequently ill; there were fewer diseases of any kind; the 
other, that the causes which produce nervous diseases in especial 
have multiplied in a greater proportion, in recent times, than the 
other general causes of illness, some of which even seem to have 
diminished.... I do not hesitate to say that if they were once the 
rarest, they are today the most frequent.’”’ And soon men 
regained that awareness, which had been so intense in the 
sixteenth century, of the precariousness of a reason that can at 
any moment be compromised, and definitively, by madness. 


222 


Matthey, a Geneva physician very close to Rousseau’s influence, 
formulates the prospect for all men of reason: “Do not glory in 
your state, if you are wise and civilized men; an instant suffices to 
disturb and annihilate that supposed wisdom of which you are so 
proud; an unexpected event, a sharp and sudden emotion of the 
soul will abruptly change the most reasonable and intelligent 
man into a raving idiot.” The threat of madness resumes its place 
among the emergencies of the century. 

This awareness, however, has a very special style. The 
obsession with unreason is a very affective one, involved in the 
movement of iconographic resurrections. The fear of madness is 
much freer with regard to this heritage; and while the return of 
unreason has the aspect of a massive repetition, connecting with 
itself outside of time, the awareness of madness is on the 
contrary accompanied by a certain analysis of modernity, which 
situates it from the start in a temporal, historical, and social 
context. In the disparity between the awareness of unreason and 
the awareness of madness, we have, at the end of the eighteenth 
century, the point of departure for a decisive movement: that by 
which the experience of unreason will continue, with Holderlin, 
Nerval, and Nietzsche, to proceed ever deeper toward the roots 
of time—unreason thus becoming, par excellence , the world’s 
contratempo —and the knowledge of madness seeking on the 
contrary to situate it ever more precisely within the development 
of nature and history. It is after this period that the time of 
