essentially passion —that is, a certain compound (movement- 
quality) belonging to both body and soul; the other, which is 
based on the discursive movement of reason reasoning with 
itself, and which addresses madness as error, as double inanity of 
language and image, as delirium. The structural cycle of passion 
and of delirium which constitutes the classical experience of 
madness reappears here in the world of techniques—but in a 


194 



syncopated form. Its unity is expressed only distantly. What is 
immediately visible, in capital letters, is the duality, almost the 
opposition, in the medicine of madness, of the methods of 
suppressing the disease, and of the forms of treating unreason. 
These latter can be reduced to three essential configurations. 

1. Awakening. Since delirium is the dream of waking persons, 
those who are delirious must be torn from this quasi-sleep, 
recalled from their waking dream and its images to an authentic 
awakening, where the dream disappears before the images of 
perception. Descartes sought this absolute awakening, which 
dismisses one by one all the forms of illusion, at the beginning of 
his Meditations , and found it, paradoxically, in the very awareness 
of the dream, in the consciousness of deluded consciousness. But 
in madmen, it is medicine which must effect the awakening, 
transforming the solitude of Cartesian courage into an 
authoritarian intervention, by the man awake and certain of his 
wakefulness, into the illusion of the man who sleeps waking: a 
short cut that dogmatically reduces Descartes’s long road. What 
Descartes discovers at the end of his resolution and in the 
doubling of a consciousness that never separates from itself and 
does not split, medicine imposes from outside, and in the 
dissociation of doctor and patient. The physician, in relation to 
the madman, reproduces the moment of the Cogito in relation 
to the time of the dream, of illusion, and of madness. A 
completely exterior Cogito, alien to cogitation itself, and which 
can be imposed upon it only in the form of an invasion. 

This structure of invasion by wakefulness is one of the most 
constant forms among the therapeutics of madness. It often 
assumes the simplest aspects, simultaneously those most highly 
charged with images and those most credited with immediate 
powers. It is asserted that a gun discharged near her cured a 
young girl of convulsions contracted as the result of severe grief. 
Without going so far as this iconographic representation of the 
methods of awakening, sudden and strong emotions achieve the 


195 



same result. It is in this spirit that Boerhaave performed his 
famous cure of convulsives at Haarlem. In the city hospital, an 
epidemic of convulsions had broken out. Antispasmodics, 
administered in strong doses, did no good. Boerhaave ordered 
“that stoves filled with burning coals be brought, and that iron 
hooks of a certain form be heated in them; thereupon, he said in 
a loud voice that since all the means hitherto employed in 
attempting to cure the convulsions had been useless, he knew of 
only one other remedy, which was to burn to the bone, with red- 
hot irons, a certain spot on the arm of any person, male or 
female, who suffered an attack of a convulsive illness.”15 

Slower, but also more certain of the truth it confronts, is the 
awakening that proceeds from wisdom itself and from its 
insistent, imperative progress through the landscapes of madness. 
From this wisdom, in its various forms, Willis sought the cure of 
the various madnesses. For imbeciles, a pedagogical wisdom; an 
“attentive and devoted master must educate them completely”; 
they must be taught, little by little and very slowly, what children 
are taught in school. For melancholics, a wisdom that takes as its 
model the most rigorous and most evident forms of truth: what 
is imaginary in their delirium will disappear in the light of an 
incontestable truth; this is why “mathematical and chemical” 
studies are strongly recommended. For the others, the wisdom of 
a well-ordered life will reduce their delirium; there is no need to 
impose upon them any other truth than that of their everyday 
life; remaining in their homes, “they must continue to manage 
their affairs, direct their families, order and cultivate their estates, 
their gardens, their orchards, their fields.” It is, on the contrary, 
the exactitude of a social order, imposed from without and, if 
necessary, by force, that can gradually restore the minds of 
maniacs to the light of truth: “For this, the insane person, placed 
in a special house, will be treated, either by the doctor or by 
trained assistants, in such a way that he may be always 


196 


maintained in his duty, in his appearance and habits, by 
warnings, by remonstrances, and by punishments immediately 

inflicted.” 16 

Little by little during the classical period, this authoritarian 
