cause the deaths of ten thousand persons” in extrajudiciary 
confession; he repeated his avowal in Latin before the tribunal; 
then he asked, of his own accord, that “the said confession 
should be published in the vulgar tongue and exhibited to each 
and every one of those present, the majority of whom knew no 
Latin, the publication and confession to his shame of the said 
offenses by him committed, in order the more easily to obtain 
the remission of sins, and the mercy of God for the pardon of 
the sins by him committed.” At the trial, the same confession 
was required before those assembled: he “was told by the 
Presiding Judge that he should state his case fully, and the shame 
that he would gain thereby would serve to lessen the punishment 
he would suffer hereafter.” Until the seventeenth century, evil in 
all its most violent and most inhuman forms could not be dealt 
with and punished unless it was brought into the open. The light 
in which confession was made and punishment executed could 
alone balance the darkness from which evil issued. In order to 
pass through all the stages of its fulfillment, evil must necessarily 
incur public avowal and manifestation before reaching the 
conclusion which suppresses it. 

Confinement, on the contrary, betrays a form of conscience to 
which the inhuman can suggest only shame. There are aspects of 
evil that have such a power of contagion, such a force of scandal 
that any publicity multiplies them infinitely. Only oblivion can 
suppress them. In a case of poisoning, Pontchartrain orders not a 
public trial but the secrecy of an asylum: “As the facts of the case 


78 



concerned a good part of Paris, the King did not believe that so 
many people should be brought to trial, many of whom had 
committed crimes unawares, and others only by the ease of doing 
so; His Majesty so determined the more readily insofar as he is 
persuaded that there are certain crimes which must absolutely be 
thrust into oblivion.”! Beyond the dangers of example, the honor 
of families and that of religion sufficed to recommend a subject 
for a house of confinement. Apropos of a priest who was to be 
sent to Saint-Lazare: “Hence a priest such as this cannot be 
hidden away with too much care for the honor of religion and 
that of the priesthood. ”3 Even late in the eighteenth century, 
Malesherbes would defend confinement as a right of families 
seeking to escape dishonor. “That which is called a base action is 
placed in the rank of those which public order does not permit us 
to tolerate.... It seems that the honor of a family requires the 
disappearance from society of the individual who by vile and 
abject habits shames his relatives.” Inversely, liberation is in order 
