would remain sterile if God did not intervene in His infinite 
mercy is acknowledged in turn by Bossuet: “At each moment, 
the hope of the harvest and the unique fruit of all our labors may 
escape us; we are at the mercy of the inconstant heavens that 


66 


bring down rain upon the tender ears.” This precarious labor to 
which nature is never obliged to respond—save by the special 
will of God—is nonetheless obligatory in all strictness: not on 
the level of natural syntheses, but on the level of moral syntheses. 
The poor man who, without consenting to “torment” the land, 
waits until God comes to his aid, since He has promised to feed 
the birds of the sky, would be disobeying the great law of 
Scripture: “Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.” Does not 
reluctance to work mean “trying beyond measure the power of 
God,” as Calvin says? It is seeking to constrain the miracle, 7 
whereas the miracle is granted daily to man as the gratuitous 
reward of his labor. If it is true that labor is not inscribed among 
the laws of nature, it is enveloped in the order of the fallen 
world. This is why idleness is rebellion—the worst form of all, in 
a sense: it waits for nature to be generous as in the innocence of 
Eden, and seeks to constrain a Goodness to which man cannot 
lay claim since Adam. Pride was the sin of man before the Fall; 
but the sin of idleness is the supreme pride of man once he has 
fallen, the absurd pride of poverty. In our world, where the land 
is no longer fertile except in thistles and weeds, idleness is the 
fault par excellence. In the Middle Ages, the great sin, radix 
malorum omnium, was pride, Superbia. According to Johan 
Huizinga, there was a time, at the dawn of the Renaissance, 
when the supreme sin assumed the aspect of Avarice, Dante’s 
cicca cupidigia. All the seventeenth-century texts, on the contrary, 
announced the infernal triumph of Sloth: it was sloth which led 
the round of the vices and swept them on. Let us not forget that 
according to the edict of its creation, the Hopital General must 
prevent “mendicancy and idleness as sources of all disorder.” 
Louis Bourdaloue echoes these condemnations of sloth, the 
wretched pride of fallen man: “What, then, is the disorder of an 
idle life? It is, replies Saint Ambrose, in its true meaning a 
second rebellion of the creature against God.” Labor in the 


67 


houses of confinement thus assumed its ethical meaning: since 
sloth had become the absolute form of rebellion, the idle would 
be forced to work, in the endless leisure of a labor without utility 
