what it believed itself to be; it was infinitely less than itself: a 
combination of persuasion and mystification. We can see here 
the genesis of Babinskf s pithiatism. And by a strange reversal, 
thought leaped back almost two centuries to the era when 
between madness, false madness, and the simulation of madness, 
the limit was indistinct—identical symptoms confused to the 
point where transgression replaced unity; further still, medical 
thought finally effected an identification over which all Western 
thought since Greek medicine had hesitated: the identification of 
madness with madness—that is, of the medical concept with the 
critical concept of madness. At the end of the nineteenth 
century, and in the thought of Babinski’s contemporaries, we 
find that prodigious postulate, which no medicine had yet dared 
formulate: that madness, after all, was only madness. 

Thus while the victim of mental illness is entirely alienated in 
the real person of his doctor, the doctor dissipates the reality of 
the mental illness in the critical concept of madness. So that 
there remains, beyond the empty forms of positivist thought, 
only a single concrete reality: the doctor-patient couple in which 
all alienations are summarized, linked, and loosened. And it is to 
this degree that all nineteenth-century psychiatry really 
converges on Freud, the first man to accept in all its seriousness 
the reality of the physician-patient couple, the first to consent 
not to look away nor to investigate elsewhere, the first not to 
attempt to hide it in a psychiatric theory that more or less 
harmonized with the rest of medical knowledge; the first to 
follow its consequences with absolute rigor. Freud demystified all 
the other asylum structures: he abolished silence and observation, 
he eliminated madness’s recognition of itself in the mirror of its 
own spectacle, he silenced the instances of condemnation. But 


287 



on the other hand he exploited the structure that enveloped the 
medical personage; he amplified its thaumaturgical virtues, 
preparing for its omnipotence a quasi-divine status. He focussed 
upon this single presence—concealed behind the patient and 
above him, in an absence that is also a total presence—all the 
powers that had been distributed in the collective existence of the 
asylum; he transformed this into an absolute Observation, a pure 
and circumspect Silence, a Judge who punishes and rewards in a 
judgment that does not even condescend to language; he made it 
the Mirror in which madness, in an almost motionless 
movement, clings to and casts off itself. 

To the doctor, Freud transferred all the structures Pinel and 
