jolting it causes the lungs and especially the viscera of the lower 
stomach, rids the blood of the excremental humors that reside 
there, gives resilience to the fibers, re-establishes the functions of 
the organs, reanimates natural heat, evacuates degenerate juices 
by perspiration or other means, or else re-establishes them in 
their previous state, dissipates obstructions, opens all passages, 


184 



and finally, through the continual movement it causes the blood, 
renews it, so to speak, and accords it an extraordinary vigor.”8 
The rolling of the sea, the most regular, the most natural 
movement in the world, and the one most in accord with cosmic 
order—that same movement which De Lancre once considered 
so dangerous for the human heart, offering as it did so many 
hazardous temptations, improbable and always unfulfilled 
dreams, constitutive of the image, in fact, of infinite evil—was 
considered by the eighteenth century as a powerful regulator of 
organic mobility. In it, the very rhythm of nature spoke. 
Gilchrist wrote an entire treatise “on the use of sea voyages in 
Medicine”; Whytt found the remedy difficult to apply to those 
subject to melancholia; it is “difficult to convince such patients to 
undertake a long sea voyage; but a case must be cited of 
hypochondriacal vapors that immediately disappeared in a young 
man who was constrained to travel in a ship for four or five 
weeks.” 

Travel has the additional interest of acting directly upon the 
flow of ideas, or at least by a more direct means, since it passes 
only through the sensations. The variety of the landscape 
dissipates the melancholic’s obstinacy: a remedy in use since 
antiquity, but which the eighteenth century prescribed with a 
new insistence, and whose forms it varied, from real travel to the 
imaginary voyages of literature and the theater. Antoine le 
Camus prescribes “in order to relax the brain” in all cases of 
vaporous affections: “walks, journeys, rides, exercise in the fresh 
air, dancing, spectacles, diverting reading, occupations that can 
cause the obsessive idea to be forgotten.” The country, by the 
gentleness and variety of its landscapes, wins melancholics from 
their single obsession “by taking them away from the places that 
might revive the memory of their sufferings.” 

But inversely, the agitation of mania can be corrected by the 
good effects of a regular movement. This is no longer a restoring 


185 


of motion but a regulation of agitation, momentarily stopping its 
course, fixing the attention. Travel is efficacious not by its 
incessant breaks in continuity, but by the novelty of the objects it 
affords, by the curiosity to which it gives birth. It should permit 
the external distraction of a mind which has escaped all control, 
and has escaped from itself in the vibration of its interior 
movement. “If one can discover objects or persons who may be 
able to distract the attention from the pursuit of deranged ideas 
and who may be able to fix it somewhat upon others, they must 
be presented often to maniacs; and it is for this reason that 
advantages may often be obtained from travel, which interrupts 
the sequence of former ideas and offers objects that fix the 

attention.”^ 

Utilized for the changes it affords in melancholia, or for the 
regularity it imposes upon mania, the therapeutics of movement 
conceals the idea of a seizure by the world of the alienated mind. 
It is both a “falling in step” and a conversion, since movement 
prescribes its rhythm, but constitutes, by its novelty or variety, a 
constant appeal to the mind to leave itself and return to the 
world. If it is true that the techniques of immersion always 
concealed the ethical, almost religious memories of ablution, of a 
second birth, in these cures by movement we can also recognize a 
symmetrical moral theme, but one that is the converse of the 
first: to return to the world, to entrust oneself to its wisdom by 
returning to one’s place in the general order of things, thus 
forgetting madness, which is the moment of pure subjectivity. 
We see how even in empiricism, the means of cure encounter the 
great organizing structures of the experience of madness in the 
classical period. Being both error and sin, madness is 
simultaneously impurity and solitude; it is withdrawn from the 
world, and from truth; but it is by that very fact imprisoned in 
evil. Its double nothingness is to be the visible form of that non- 
being which is evil, and to utter, in the void and in the 


186 


sensational appearances of its delirium, the non-being of error. It 
is totally pure , since it is nothing if not the evanescent point of a 
subjectivity from which all presence of the truth has been 
removed; and totally impure , since this nothingness is the non- 
being of evil. The technique of cure, down to its physical 
symbols most highly charged with iconographic intensity— 
consolidation and return to movement on the one hand, 
purification and immersion on the other—is secretly organized 
