from them”; another—the Abbe de Montcrif—makes the same 
complaint to Lieutenant Berryer: “This is the ninth month that I 
have been confined here in this dreadful place with fifteen or 
twenty raving madmen, pell-mell with epileptics.” The farther 
we advance into the century, the stronger grow these protests 
against confinement: increasingly, madness becomes the specter 
of the internees, the very image of their humiliation, of their 
reason vanquished and reduced to silence. The day soon comes 
when Mirabeau recognizes in the shameful promiscuity of 
madness both a subtle instrument of brutality against those to be 
punished and the very image of despotism, bestiality triumphant. 
The madman is not the first and the most innocent victim of 
confinement, but the most obscure and the most visible, the 
most insistent of the symbols of the confining power. Tyranny 
secretly persists among the confined in this lurid presence of 
unreason. The struggle against the established powers, against 
the family, against the Church, continues at the very heart of 
confinement, in the saturnalia of reason. And madness so well 
represents these punishing powers that it effectively plays the 
part of an additional punishment, a further torment which 
maintains order in the uniform chastisement of the houses of 
correction. La Rochefoucauld-Liancourt bears witness to this in 
his report to the Committee on Mendicity: “One of the 
punishments inflicted upon the epileptics and upon the other 


236 



patients of the wards, even upon the deserving poor, is to place 
them among the mad.” The scandal lies only in the fact that the 
madmen are the brutal truth of confinement, the passive 
instrument of all that is worst about it. Is this not symbolized by 
the fact—also a commonplace of all the literature of confinement 
in the eighteenth century—that a sojourn in a house of 
correction necessarily leads to madness? Having to live in this 
delirious world, amid the triumph of unreason, how may one 
avoid joining, by the fatality of the site and the event, the very 
men who are its living symbol? “I observe that the majority of the 
insane confined in the houses of correction and the State prisons 
have become so, the latter through the excess of ill-treatment, 
the former through the horror of the solitude in which they 
continually encounter the harassments of an imagination 
sharpened by pain.”l 

The presence of madmen among the prisoners is not the 
scandalous limit of confinement, but its truth; not abuse, but 
essence. The polemic instituted by the eighteenth century against 
confinement certainly dealt with the enforced mingling of the 
