it could only be artificial, the market price of such products being 
disproportionate to the cost of manufacture, calculated according 
to the expenses occasioned by confinement itself. 

Measured by their functional value alone, the creation of the 
houses of confinement can be regarded as a failure. Their 
disappearance throughout Europe, at the beginning of the 
nineteenth century, as receiving centers for the indigent and 
prisons of poverty, was to sanction their ultimate failure: a 
transitory and ineffectual remedy, a social precaution clumsily 
formulated by a nascent industrialization. And yet, in this very 
failure, the classical period conducted an irreducible experiment. 
What appears to us today as a clumsy dialectic of production and 
prices then possessed its real meaning as a certain ethical 


65 


consciousness of labor, in which the difficulties of the economic 
mechanisms lost their urgency in favor of an affirmation of value. 

In this first phase of the industrial world, labor did not seem 
linked to the problems it was to provoke; it was regarded, on the 
contrary, as a general solution, an infallible panacea, a remedy to 
all forms of poverty. Labor and poverty were located in a simple 
opposition, in inverse proportion to each other. As for that 
power, its special characteristic, of abolishing poverty, labor— 
according to the classical interpretation—possessed it not so 
much by its productive capacity as by a certain force of moral 
enchantment. Labor’s effectiveness was acknowledged because it 
was based on an ethical transcendence. Since the Fall, man had 
accepted labor as a penance and for its power to work 
redemption. It was not a law of nature which forced man to 
work, but the effect of a curse. The earth was innocent of that 
sterility in which it would slumber if man remained idle: “The 
land had not sinned, and if it is accursed, it is by the labor of the 
fallen man who cultivates it; from it no fruit is won, particularly 
the most necessary fruit, save by force and continual labor.”6 

The obligation to work was not linked to any confidence in 
nature; and it was not even through an obscure loyalty that the 
land would reward man’s labor. The theme was constant among 
Catholic thinkers, as among the Protestants, that labor does not 
bear its own fruits. Produce and wealth were not found at the 
term of a dialectic of labor and nature. Here is Calvin’s 
admonition: “Nor do we believe, according as men will be 
vigilant and skillful, according as they will have done their duty 
well, that they can make their land fertile; it is the benediction of 
God which governs all things.” And this danger of a labor which 
would remain sterile if God did not intervene in His infinite 
mercy is acknowledged in turn by Bossuet: “At each moment, 
the hope of the harvest and the unique fruit of all our labors may 
escape us; we are at the mercy of the inconstant heavens that 


66 


bring down rain upon the tender ears.” This precarious labor to 
which nature is never obliged to respond—save by the special 
will of God—is nonetheless obligatory in all strictness: not on 
the level of natural syntheses, but on the level of moral syntheses. 
The poor man who, without consenting to “torment” the land, 
waits until God comes to his aid, since He has promised to feed 
the birds of the sky, would be disobeying the great law of 
Scripture: “Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.” Does not 
reluctance to work mean “trying beyond measure the power of 
God,” as Calvin says? It is seeking to constrain the miracle, 7 
whereas the miracle is granted daily to man as the gratuitous 
reward of his labor. If it is true that labor is not inscribed among 
the laws of nature, it is enveloped in the order of the fallen 
world. This is why idleness is rebellion—the worst form of all, in 
a sense: it waits for nature to be generous as in the innocence of 
Eden, and seeks to constrain a Goodness to which man cannot 
lay claim since Adam. Pride was the sin of man before the Fall; 
but the sin of idleness is the supreme pride of man once he has 
fallen, the absurd pride of poverty. In our world, where the land 
is no longer fertile except in thistles and weeds, idleness is the 
fault par excellence. In the Middle Ages, the great sin, radix 
malorum omnium, was pride, Superbia. According to Johan 
Huizinga, there was a time, at the dawn of the Renaissance, 
when the supreme sin assumed the aspect of Avarice, Dante’s 
cicca cupidigia. All the seventeenth-century texts, on the contrary, 
announced the infernal triumph of Sloth: it was sloth which led 
the round of the vices and swept them on. Let us not forget that 
according to the edict of its creation, the Hopital General must 
prevent “mendicancy and idleness as sources of all disorder.” 
Louis Bourdaloue echoes these condemnations of sloth, the 
wretched pride of fallen man: “What, then, is the disorder of an 
idle life? It is, replies Saint Ambrose, in its true meaning a 
second rebellion of the creature against God.” Labor in the 


67 


houses of confinement thus assumed its ethical meaning: since 
sloth had become the absolute form of rebellion, the idle would 
be forced to work, in the endless leisure of a labor without utility 
