whole tradition of Western medicine dating from Hippocrates 
here intersects, suddenly and for only a few years, with one of the 
major forms of theatrical experience. Before us appears the great 
theme of a crisis that confronts the madman with his own 
meaning, reason with unreason, man’s lucid ruse with the 
blindness of the lunatic—a crisis which marks the point at which 
illusion, turned back upon itself, will open to the dazzlement of 
truth. 


199 


This opening is imminent in the crisis; in fact it is this 
opening, with its immediate proximity, that constitutes the 
essential element of the crisis. But the opening does not result 
from the crisis itself In order for the crisis to be medical and not 
simply dramatic, in order for it to be not an annihilation of the 
man, but simply a suppression of the disease; in short, in order 
for the dramatic representation of the delirium to have an effect 
of comic purification, a ruse must be introduced at a given 
moment. A ruse, or at least an element which surreptitiously 
alters the autonomous operation of the delirium, and which, 
ceaselessly confirming it, does not bind it to its own truth 
without at the same time linking it to the necessity for its own 
suppression. The simplest example of this method is the ruse 
employed with delirious patients who imagine they perceive 
within their bodies an object or an extraordinary animal: “When 
an invalid believes that he has a living animal shut up within his 
body, one must pretend to have withdrawn it; if it is in the 
stomach, one may, by means of a powerful purge, produce this 
effect, throwing such an animal into the basin without the 
patient’s noticing.”19 The theatrical device represents the object 
of the delirium but cannot do so without externalizing it, and if 
it gives the invalid a perceptual confirmation of his illusion, it 
does so only while ridding him of it by force. The artificial 
reconstitution of delirium constitutes the real distance in which 
the sufferer recovers his liberty. 

But sometimes, there is even no need of this “distancing.” It is 
within the quasi-perception of the delirium that there is 
established, by means of a ruse, a perceptual element, silent at 
first, but whose gradual affirmation will come to contest the 
entire system. It is in himself and in the perception which 
confirms his delirium that the sufferer perceives the liberating 
reality. Trallion reports how a physician dissipated the delirium 
of a melancholic who imagined he had no head, but only a kind 


200 


of void in its place; the physician, entering into the delirium, 
agreed at the sufferer’s request to fill up this space, and placed 
upon his head a great ball of lead. Soon the discomfort that 
resulted from the painful weight convinced the invalid that he 
had a head. Ultimately the ruse and its function of comic 
reduction can be assured, with the complicity of the physician 
but without any other direct intervention on his part, by the 
spontaneous reaction of the sufferer’s organism. In the case cited 
above of the melancholic who was really dying because he would 
not eat, believing himself already dead, the theatrical 
representation of a dead men’s banquet incited him to eat; this 
nourishment restored him, “the consumption of food made him 
quieter,” and the organic disorder thus disappearing, the delirium 
which was indissociably cause and effect disappeared forthwith. 
Thus the real death that would have resulted from the imaginary 
death was avoided by reality, by the mere representation of 
unreal death. The exchange of non-being with itself is carried 
out in this ingenious play: the non-being of delirium is turned 
against the being of the illness, and suppresses it by the simple 
fact that it is driven out of the delirium by dramatic 
representation. The fulfillment of delirium’s non-being in being 
is able to suppress it as non-being itself; and this by the pure 
mechanism of its internal contradiction—a mechanism that is 
both a play on words and a play of illusion, games of language 
and of the image; the delirium, in effect, is suppressed as non- 
being since it becomes a perceived form of being; but since the 
being of delirium is entirely in its non-being, it is suppressed as 
delirium. And its confirmation in theatrical fantasy restores it to 
a truth which, by holding it captive in reality, drives it out of 
reality itself, and makes it disappear in the non-delirious 
discourse of reason. 

3. The Return to the Immediate. Since madness is illusion, the 
cure of madness, if it is true that such a cure can be effected by 
theater, can also and still more directly be effected by the 


201 



suppression of theater. To entrust madness and its empty world 
directly to the plenitude of a nature which does not deceive 
because its immediacy does not acknowledge non-being, is to 
deliver madness both to its own truth (since madness, as a 
disease, is after all only a natural being), and to its closest 
contradiction (since delirium, as appearance without content, is 
the very contrary of the often secret and invisible wealth of 
