fearing that this shame might be transitory and this remorse too 
superficial, “the director, in order to impress a feeling of terror 
upon her, spoke to her with the most energetic firmness, but 
without anger, and announced to her that she would henceforth 
be treated with the greatest severity.” The desired result was not 
long in coming: “Her repentance was announced by a torrent of 
tears which she shed for almost two hours.” The cycle is 
complete twice over: the transgression is punished and its author 
recognizes her guilt. 

There were, however, madmen who escaped from this 
movement and resisted the moral synthesis it brought about. 
These latter would be set apart in the heart of the asylum, 
forming a new confined population, which could not even relate 
to justice. When we speak of Pinel and his work of liberation, we 
too often omit this second reclusion. We have already seen that 
he denied the benefits of asylum reform to “fanatics who believe 
themselves inspired and seek to make converts, and who take a 
perfidious pleasure in inciting the other madmen to disobedience 


278 


on the pretext that it is better to obey God than man.” But 
confinement and the dungeon will be equally obligatory for 
“those who cannot be subjected to the general law of work and 
who, in malicious activity, enjoy tormenting the other inmates, 
provoking and ceaselessly inciting them to subjects of discord,” 
and for women “who during their seizures have an irresistible 
propensity to steal anything they can lay their hands on.” 
Disobedience by religious fanaticism, resistance to work, and 
theft, the three great transgressions against bourgeois society, the 
three major offenses against its essential values, are not excusable, 
even by madness; they deserve imprisonment pure and simple, 
exclusion in the most rigorous sense of the term, since they all 
manifest the same resistance to the moral and social uniformity 
that forms the raison d'etre of Pinefs asylum. 

Formerly, unreason was set outside of judgment, to be 
delivered, arbitrarily, to the powers of reason. Now it is judged, 
and not only upon entering the asylum, in order to be 
recognized, classified, and made innocent forever; it is caught, on 
the contrary, in a perpetual judgment, which never ceases to 
pursue it and to apply sanctions, to proclaim its transgressions, to 
require honorable amends, to exclude, finally, those whose 
transgressions risk compromising the social order. Madness 
escaped from the arbitrary only in order to enter a kind of 
endless trial for which the asylum furnished simultaneously 
police, magistrates, and torturers; a trial whereby any 
transgression in life, by a virtue proper to life in the asylum, 
becomes a social crime, observed, condemned, and punished; a 
trial which has no outcome but in a perpetual recommencement 
in the internalized form of remorse. The madmen “delivered” by 
Pinel and, after him, the madmen of modern confinement are 
under arraignment; if they have the privilege of no longer being 
associated or identified with convicts, they are condemned, at 
every moment, to be subject to an accusation whose text is never 
given, for it is their entire life in the asylum which constitutes it. 


279 



The asylum of the age of positivism, which it is Pinel’s glory to 
have founded, is not a free realm of observation, diagnosis, and 
therapeutics; it is a juridical space where one is accused, judged, 
and condemned, and from which one is never released except by 
the version of this trial in psychological depth—that is, by 
remorse. Madness will be punished in the asylum, even if it is 
innocent outside of it. For a long time to come, and until our 
own day at least, it is imprisoned in a moral world. 

To silence, to recognition in the mirror, to perpetual 
judgment, we must add a fourth structure peculiar to the world 
of the asylum as it was constituted at the end of the eighteenth 
century: this is the apotheosis of the medical personage. Of them 
all, it is doubtless the most important, since it would authorize 
not only new contacts between doctor and patient, but a new 
relation between insanity and medical thought, and ultimately 
command the whole modern experience of madness. Hitherto, 
we find in the asylums only the same structures of confinement, 
but displaced and deformed. With the new status of the medical 
personage, the deepest meaning of confinement is abolished: 
mental disease, with the meanings we now give it, is made 
possible. 

The work of Tuke and of Pinel, whose spirit and values are so 
different, meet in this transformation of the medical personage. 
The physician, as we have seen, played no part in the life of 
confinement. Now he becomes the essential figure of the asylum. 
He is in charge of entry. The ruling at the Retreat is precise: “On 
the admission of patients, the committee should, in general, 
require a certificate signed by a medical person.... It should also 
be stated whether the patient is afflicted with any complaint 
independent of insanity. It is also desirable that some account 
should be sent, how long the patient has been disordered; 
whether any, or what sort of medical means have been used. ”17 
From the end of the eighteenth century, the medical certificate 
