eyes of madness were fixed and out of which the forms of the 
impossible were born. Oblivion falls upon the world navigated by 
the free slaves of the Ship of Fools. Madness will no longer 
proceed from a point within the world to a point beyond, on its 


45 



strange voyage; it will never again be that fugitive and absolute 
limit. Behold it moored now, made fast among things and men. 
Retained and maintained. No longer a ship but a hospital. 

Scarcely a century after the career of the mad ships, we note 
the appearance of the theme of the “Hospital of Madmen,” the 
“Madhouse.” Here every empty head, fixed and classified 
according to the true reason of men, utters contradiction and 
irony, the double language of Wisdom: "... the Hospital of 
incurable Madmen, where are recited from end to end all the 
follies and fevers of the mind, by men as well as women, a task 
no less useful than enjoyable, and necessary for the acquisition of 
true wisdom.”10 Here each form of madness finds its proper 
place, its distinguishing mark, and its tutelary divinity: frenzied 
and ranting madness, symbolized by a fool astride a chair, 
struggles beneath Minerva’s gaze; the somber melancholics that 
roam the countryside, solitary and avid wolves, have as their god 
Jupiter, patron of animal metamorphoses; then come the “mad 
drunkards,” the “madmen deprived of memory and 
understanding,” the “madmen benumbed and half-dead,” the 
“madmen of giddy and empty heads” ... All this world of 
disorder, in perfect order, pronounces, each in his turn, the 
Praise of Reason. Already, in this “Hospital,” confinement has 
succeeded embarkation. 

Tamed, madness preserves all the appearances of its reign. It 
now takes part in the measures of reason and in the labor of 
truth. It plays on the surface of things and in the glitter of 
daylight, over all the workings of appearances, over the 
ambiguity of reality and illusion, over all that indeterminate web, 
ever rewoven and broken, which both unites and separates truth 
and appearance. It hides and manifests, it utters truth and 
falsehood, it is light and shadow. It shimmers, a central and 
indulgent figure, already precarious in this baroque age. 

Let us not be surprised to come upon it so often in the fictions 


46 

