at the Retreat: by the visits he paid regularly to the patients, by 
the authority he exercised in the house over all the staff, “the 
physician ... sometimes possesses more influence over the 
patients’ minds, than the other attendants.” 

It is thought that Tuke and Pinel opened the asylum to 
medical knowledge. They did not introduce science, but a 
personality, whose powers borrowed from science only their 
disguise, or at most their justification. These powers, by their 
nature, were of a moral and social order; they took root in the 
madman’s minority status, in the insanity of his person, not of 
his mind. If the medical personage could isolate madness, it was 
not because he knew it, but because he mastered it; and what for 
positivism would be an image of objectivity was only the other 
side of this domination. “It is a very important object to win the 
confidence of these sufferers, and to arouse in them feelings of 
respect and obedience, which can only be the fruit of superior 
discernment, distinguished education, and dignity of tone and 
manner. Stupidity, ignorance, and the lack of principles, 
sustained by a tyrannical harshness, may incite fear, but always 
inspire distrust. The keeper of madmen who has obtained 
domination over them directs and rules their conduct as he 
pleases; he must be endowed with a firm character, and on 
occasion display an imposing strength. He must threaten little 
but carry out his threats, and if he is disobeyed, punishment must 
immediately ensue. ”19 The physician could exercise his absolute 
authority in the world of the asylum only insofar as, from the 


282 


beginning, he was Father and Judge, Family and Law—his 
medical practice being for a long time no more than a 
complement to the old rites of Order, Authority, and 
Punishment. And Pinel was well aware that the doctor cures 
when, exclusive of modern therapeutics, he brings into play these 
immemorial figures. 

Pinel cites the case of a girl of seventeen who had been raised 
by her parents with “extreme indulgence”; she had fallen into a 
“giddy, mad delirium without any cause that could be 
determined”; at the hospital she was treated with great 
gentleness, but she always showed a certain “haughtiness” which 
could not be tolerated at the asylum; she spoke “of her parents 
with nothing but bitterness.” It was decided to subject her to a 
regime of strict authority; “the keeper, in order to tame this 
inflexible character, seized the moment of the bath and expressed 
himself forcibly concerning certain unnatural persons who dared 
oppose their parents and disdain their authority. He warned the 
