

134 



main forms of medical explanation—by solids and by fluids— 
and ultimately causes them to intersect, thus distinguishing two 
kinds of melancholia. The one whose origin is in solids is 
nervous melancholia: a particularly strong sensation agitates the 
fibers which receive it; as a result, tension increases in the other 
fibers, which become more rigid and at the same time susceptible 
to further vibration. But should the sensation become even 
stronger, then the tension increases to such a degree in the other 
fibers that they become incapable of vibrating; the state of 
rigidity is such that the flow of blood is stopped and the animal 
spirits immobilized. Melancholia has set in. In the other form of 
disease, the “liquid form,” the humors are impregnated with 
black bile; they become thicker; clogged with these humors, the 
blood thickens and stagnates in the meninges until it compresses 
the principal organs of the nervous system. Then we find again 
the rigidity of the fibers, but in this case it is no more than a 
consequence of a humoral phenomenon. Lorry distinguishes two 
melancholias: actually it is the same group of qualities, affording 
melancholia its real unity, that he employs successively in two 
explanatory systems. Only the theoretical edifice has been 
doubled. The qualitative basis in experience remains the same. 

A symbolic unity formed by the languor of the fluids, by the 
darkening of the animal spirits and the shadowy twilight they 
spread over the images of things, by the viscosity of the blood 
that laboriously trickles through the vessels, by the thickening of 
vapors that have become blackish, deleterious, and acrid, by 
visceral functions that have become slow and somehow slimy— 
this unity, more a product of sensibility than of thought or 
theory, gives melancholia its characteristic stamp. 

It is this undertaking, more than faithful observation, which 
reorganizes melancholias symptoms and mode of appearance. 
The theme of a partial delirium increasingly disappears as a 
major symptom of melancholics in favor of qualitative data like 
sadness, bitterness, a preference for solitude, immobility. At the 


135 



end of the eighteenth century, all forms of madness without 
delirium, but characterized by inertia, by despair, by a sort of dull 
