that analyzes the strength to be found imprisoned in each. Thus 
cold and dryness can enter into conflict with the temperament, 
and this opposition will generate symptoms of melancholia 
violent in proportion to the struggle: the strength that prevails 
and sweeps away all that resists it. Thus women, whose nature is 
little inclined to melancholy, fall a prey to it all the more 
seriously: “They are cruelly used and violently disturbed by it, for 
melancholia being more opposed to their temperament, it 
removes them further from their natural constitution. ”4 

3. But it is sometimes within the quality itself that the conflict 
is generated. A quality may alter in the course of its development 
and become the opposite of what it was. Thus when “the entrails 
are heated, when all simmers within the body ... and all the 
juices are consumed,” then this conflagration can turn to cold 
melancholia—producing “almost the same thing caused by the 
flow of wax in a torch turned upside down.... This cooling of the 
body is the ordinary effect which follows immoderate heat once 
it has thrown off and exhausted its vigor. ”5 There is a kind of 
dialectic of qualities which, free from any constraint of substance, 
from any predetermination, makes its way through reversals and 
contradictions. 

4. Finally, qualities may be altered by accidents, circumstances, 
the conditions of life; so that a being who is dry and cold can 
become warm and humid, if his way of life inclines him to it; as 
in the case of women: they “remain in idleness, their bodies tend 
to perspire less [than those of men], and heat, spirits, and 
humors remain within.”6 


131 


Thus freed from a confining substantial basis, qualities would 
be able to play an organizing and integrating role in the notion 
of melancholia. On the one hand, they would trace, among the 
symptoms and manifestations, a certain profile of sadness, of 
blackness, of slowness, of immobility. On the other, they would 
suggest a causal basis which would no longer be the physiology 
of a humor, but the pathology of an idea, of a fear, of a terror. 
The morbid entity was not defined from observed signs nor from 
supposed causes; but somewhere between, and beyond both, it 
was perceived as a certain qualitative coherence, which had its 
own laws of transmission, of development, and of 
transformation. It is the secret logic of this quality that controls 
the development of the idea of melancholia, not medical theory. 
This is evident as early as Thomas Willis’s texts. 

At first glance, the coherence of their analyses is vouched for 
on the level of speculative reflection. Willis’s explanation is 
borrowed whole from animal spirits and their mechanical 
properties. Melancholia is “a madness without fever or frenzy, 
accompanied by fear and sadness.” To the extent that it is 
delirium—that is, an essential break with truth—its origin 
resides in a disordered movement of the spirits and in a defective 
state of the brain; but can that fear, that anxiety which makes 
melancholics “sad and punctilious,” be explained by movements 
alone? Might there be a mechanism of fear and a circulation of 
spirits that is peculiar to sadness? This is obvious to Descartes; it 
is no longer so for Willis. Melancholia cannot be treated like a 
paralysis, an apoplexy, a vertigo, or a convulsion. In fact, it 
cannot even be analyzed as a simple dementia, although 
melancholic delirium supposes a similar disorder in the 
movement of spirits; disturbances in the mechanism easily 
explain delirium—that error common to all madness, dementia 
or melancholia—but not the quality peculiar to delirium, the 
coloration of sadness and fear which makes its landscape so 
unique. One must penetrate the secret of predispositions. After 


132 



all, it is these essential qualities, hidden in the very grain of the 
subtle matter, that explain the paradoxical movements of the 
spirits. 

In melancholia, the spirits are swept by an agitation, but a 
feeble agitation, without power or violence: a sort of impotent 
jostling which does not follow marked paths, nor open roads 
(aperta opercula ), but traverses the cerebral matter by endlessly 
creating new pores; yet the spirits do not wander far upon the 
paths they trace; very soon their agitation languishes, their 

strength fails, and the movement stops: “they do not reach far.”? 
Thus such disturbance, common to all delirium, can produce on 
the surface of the body neither those violent movements nor 
those cries that may be observed in mania and frenzy; 
melancholia never reaches violence; it is madness at the limits of 
its powerless ness. This paradox is the result of the secret 
alterations of the spirits. Usually they have the quasi-immediate 
rapidity and the absolute transparence of luminous rays; but in 
melancholia, they are charged with darkness; they become 
“obscure, opaque, shadowy”; and the images of things which they 
bear to the brain and to the mind are veiled with “shadow and 
with shades.” They become heavy and closer to a dark chemical 
vapor than to pure light. A chemical vapor that would be of an 
acid nature, rather than sulfurous or alcoholic: for in acid vapors 
