as the continuous and constant form of existence. And where 
once man s madness had been not to see that death’s term was 
approaching, so that it was necessary to recall him to wisdom 
with the spectacle of death, now wisdom consisted of 
denouncing madness everywhere, teaching men that they were 


27 


no more than dead men already, and that if the end was near, it 
was to the degree that madness, become universal, would be one 
and the same with death itself. This is what Eustache 
Deschamps prophesies: 

We are cowardly and weak, 

Covetous, old, evil-tongued. 

Fools are all I see, in truth. 

The end is near, 

All goes ill ... 

The elements are now reversed. It is no longer the end of time 
and of the world which will show retrospectively that men were 
mad not to have been prepared for them; it is the tide of 
madness, its secret invasion, that shows that the world is near its 
final catastrophe; it is man s insanity that invokes and makes 
necessary the world’s end. 

In its various forms—plastic or literary—this experience of 
madness seems extremely coherent. Painting and text constantly 
refer to one another—commentary here and illustration there. 
We find the same theme of the Narrentanz over and over in 
popular festivals, in theatrical performances, in engravings and 
woodcuts, and the entire last part of the Praise of Folly is 
constructed on the model of a long dance of madmen in which 
each profession and each estate parades in turn to form the great 
round of unreason. It is likely that in Bosch’s Temptation of Saint 
Anthony in Lisbon, many figures of the fantastic fauna which 
invade the canvas are borrowed from traditional masks; some 
perhaps are transferred from the Malleus maleficarum. As for the 
famous Ship of Fools , is it not a direct translation of Brant’s 
Narrenschiff whose title it bears, and of which it seems to 
illustrate quite precisely canto XXVII, also consecrated to 
stigmatizing “drunkards and gluttons”? It has even been 


28 



suggested that Bosch’s painting was part of a series of pictures 
illustrating the principal cantos of Brant’s poem. 

As a matter of fact, we must not be misled by what appears to 
be a strict continuity in these themes, nor imagine more than is 
revealed by history itself. It is unlikely that an analysis like the 
one Emile Male worked out for the preceding epochs, especially 
apropos of the theme of death, could be repeated. Between word 
and image, between what is depicted by language and what is 
uttered by plastic form, the unity begins to dissolve; a single and 
identical meaning is not immediately common to them. And if it 
is true that the image still has the function of speaking, of 
transmitting something consubstantial with language, we must 
recognize that it already no longer says the same thing ; and that 
by its own plastic values painting engages in an experiment that 
will take it farther and farther from language, whatever the 
superficial identity of the theme. Figure and speech still illustrate 
the same fable of folly in the same moral world, but already they 
take two different directions, indicating, in a still barely 
perceptible scission, what will be the great line of cleavage in the 
Western experience of madness. 

The dawn of madness on the horizon of the Renaissance is 
first perceptible in the decay of Gothic symbolism; as if that 
world, whose network of spiritual meanings was so close-knit, 
had begun to unravel, showing faces whose meaning was no 
longer clear except in the forms of madness. The Gothic forms 
persist for a time, but little by little they grow silent, cease to 
speak, to remind, to teach anything but their own fantastic 
presence, transcending all possible language (though still familiar 
to the eye). Freed from wisdom and from the teaching that 
organized it, the image begins to gravitate about its own 
madness. 

Paradoxically, this liberation derives from a proliferation of 
meaning, from a self-multiplication of significance, weaving 
relationships so numerous, so intertwined, so rich, that they can 


29 



no longer be deciphered except in the esoterism of knowledge. 
Things themselves become so burdened with attributes, signs, 
allusions that they finally lose their own form. Meaning is no 
