passing into the blood, without penetrating the organism 
substantially, fortified the membranes and fibers directly. More 
than an observed effect, the consolidation of the spirits and the 


173 



nerves appears rather as an operative metaphor which implies a 
transfer of strength without any discursive dynamics. Strength is 
supplied by contact, exclusive of any exchange or substance, any 
communication of movements. 

2. Purification. Clogging of the viscera, ebullition of false 
ideas, fermentation of vapors, violence, corruption of liquids and 
spirits—madness elicits an entire series of therapeutics, each of 
which can be attached to the identical operation of purification. 

The ideal was a sort of total purification: the simplest but also 
the most impossible of cures. It would consist of substituting for 
the melancholic’s overcharged, thick blood, encumbered with 
bitter humors, a light, clear blood whose new movement would 
dissipate the delirium. In 1662 Moritz Hoffman suggested blood 
transfusion as a remedy for melancholia. Some years later, the 
idea had attained sufficient currency for the Philosophical 
Society of London to plan a series of experiments upon the 
subjects confined in Bedlam; Allen, the doctor entrusted with 
the enterprise, refused. But Jean-Baptiste Denis tried it upon one 
of his patients stricken with amorous melancholia; he drew off 
ten ounces of blood, which he replaced with a slightly smaller 
quantity taken from the femoral artery of a calf; the following 
day he began again, but this time the operation involved only a 
few ounces. The patient became calm; the following day his 
mind cleared; he was soon entirely cured; “all the professors of 
the Academy of Surgeons attested it.” The technique, however, 
was quickly abandoned, despite a few later attempts. 

The preferred medications were those that forestalled 
corruption. We know “as a result of more than three thousand 
years of experience that Myrrh and Aloes preserve corpses.”2 Are 
not these deteriorations of bodies of the same nature as those 
that accompany the diseases of the humors? Then nothing would 
be more recommendable against the vapors than products like 
myrrh or aloes, and especially the famous elixir of Paracelsus. But 


174 


