of an animality that lies in wait and, all at once, undoes reason in 
violence and truth in the madmans frenzy. Despite the 
contemporary effort to constitute a positivist zoology, this 
obsession with an animality perceived as the natural locus of 
madness continued to people the hell of the classical age. It was 
this obsession that created the imagery responsible for all the 
practices of confinement and the strangest aspects of its savagery. 

It has doubtless been essential to Western culture to link, as it 
has done, its perception of madness to the iconographic forms of 
the relation of man to beast. From the start, Western culture has 
not considered it evident that animals participate in the 
plenitude of nature, in its wisdom and its order: this idea was a 
late one and long remained on the surface of culture; perhaps it 
has not yet penetrated very deeply into the subterranean regions 
of the imagination. In fact, on close examination, it becomes 
evident that the animal belongs rather to an anti-nature, to a 
negativity that threatens order and by its frenzy endangers the 
positive wisdom of nature. The work of Lautreamont bears 
witness to this. Why should the fact that Western man has lived 
for two thousand years on his definition as a rational animal 
necessarily mean that he has recognized the possibility of an 
order common to reason and to animality? Why should he have 
necessarily designated, by this definition, the way in which he 
inserts himself in natural positivity? Independently of what 
Aristotle really meant, may we not assume that for the West this 
“rational animal” has long been the measure of the way in which 
reason s freedom functioned in the locus of unreason, diverging 
from it until it constituted its opposite term? From the moment 
philosophy became anthropology, and man sought to recognize 


88 



himself in a natural plenitude, the animal lost its power of 
negativity, in order to become, between the determinism of 
nature and the reason of man, the positive form of an evolution. 
The formula of the “rational animal” has utterly changed its 
meaning: the unreason it suggested as the origin of all possible 
reason has entirely disappeared. Henceforth madness must obey 
the determinism of man perceived as a natural being in his very 
animality. In the classical age, if it is true that the scientific and 
medical analysis of madness, as we shall see below, sought to 
establish it within this natural mechanism, the real practices that 
concern the insane bear sufficient witness to the fact that 
madness was still contained in the anti-natural violence of 
animality. 

