evil by itself, instituting another reign of terror. 

Suddenly, in a few years in the middle of the eighteenth 
century, a fear arose—a fear formulated in medical terms but 
animated, basically, by a moral myth. People were in dread of a 
mysterious disease that spread, it was said, from the houses of 
confinement and would soon threaten the cities. They spoke of 


213 



prison fevers; they evoked the wagons of criminals, men in 
chains who passed through the cities, leaving disease in their 
wake; scurvy was thought to cause contagions; it was said that 
the air, tainted by disease, would corrupt the residential quarters. 
And the great image of medieval horror reappeared, giving birth, 
in the metaphors of dread, to a second panic. The house of 
confinement was no longer only the lazar house at the city’s 
edge; it was leprosy itself confronting the town: “A terrible ulcer 
upon the body politic, an ulcer that is wide, deep, and draining, 
one that cannot be imagined except by looking full upon it. Even 
the air of the place, which can be smelled four hundred yards 
away—everything suggests that one is approaching a place of 
violence, an asylum of degradation and infortune.”3 Many of 
these centers of confinement were built in the very places where 
the lepers had once been kept; it was as if, across the centuries, 
the new tenants had received the contagion. They revived the 
blazon and the meaning that had been borne in those places: 
“Too great a leper for the capital! The name of Bicetre is a word 
no one can pronounce without an inexpressible feeling of 
repugnance, of horror and contempt.... It has become the 
receptacle for all the most monstrous and vile things to be found 
in society.”4 

The evil which men had attempted to exclude by confinement 
reappeared, to the horror of the public, in a fantastic guise. There 
appeared, ramifying in every direction, the themes of an evil, 
both physical and moral, that enveloped in this very ambiguity 
the mingled powers of corrosion and horror. There prevailed, 
then, a sort of undifferentiated image of “rottenness” that had to 
do with the corruption of morals as well as with the 
decomposition of the flesh, and upon which were based both the 
repugnance and the pity felt for the confined. First the evil began 
to ferment in the closed spaces of confinement. It had all the 
virtues attributed to acid in eighteenth-century chemistry: its fine 


214 


particles, sharp as needles, penetrated bodies and hearts as easily 
as if they were passive and friable alkaline particles. The mixture 
boiled immediately, releasing harmful vapors and corrosive 
liquids: “These wards are a dreadful place where all crimes 
together ferment and spread around them, as by fermentation, a 
contagious atmosphere which those who live there breathe and 

which seems to become attached to them.” These burning 
vapors then rise, spread through the air, and finally fall upon the 
neighborhood, impregnating bodies and contaminating souls. 
Thus the idea of a contagion of evil-as-rottenness is articulated 
in images. The palpable agent of this epidemic is air, that air 
which is called “tainted,” the term obscurely suggesting that it is 
not in conformity with the purity of its nature, and that it acts as 
the communicating element of the taint. It is sufficient to 
remember the value, both moral and medical, ascribed at about 
the same period to country air (bodily health, spiritual vigor), to 
realize the whole complex of contrary meanings conveyed by the 
corrupted air of hospitals, prisons, houses of confinement. By 
this atmosphere laden with maleficent vapors, entire cities were 
threatened, whose inhabitants would be slowly impregnated with 
rottenness and taint. 

And these are not only reflections halfway between morality 
and medicine. We must doubtless take into account an entire 
literary development, a whole emotional, perhaps political 
exploitation of vague fears. But in certain cities there were 
movements of panic as real, as easy to date, as the great crises of 
horror that wracked the Middle Ages from time to time. In 1780 
an epidemic spread through Paris: its origin was attributed to the 
infection of the Hopital General; there was even talk of burning 
the buildings of Bicetre. The police lieutenant, faced with the 
frenzy of the population, sent a commission of inquiry which 
included, together with several staff doctors, the Dean of the 
Faculte and the physician of the Hopital General. According to 


215 


their findings, Bicetre was subject to a “putrid fever” which was 
linked to the bad quality of the air. As for the original source of 
the disease, the report denied that it lay in the internees and the 
infection they might spread; it must be attributed quite simply to 
the bad weather that made the disease endemic in the capital; the 
symptoms that were to be observed at the Hopital General were 
“in accordance with the nature of the season and exactly the same 
as the illnesses observed in Paris at the same period.” The 
