lead it to its fulfillment. If illusion can appear as true as 
perception, perception in its turn can become the visible, 
unchallengeable truth of illusion. Such is the first step of the cure 
by “theatrical representation”: to integrate the unreality of the 
image into perceived truth, without the latter seeming to 
contradict or even contest the former. Thus Zacatus Lusitanus 
describes the cure of a melancholic who believed himself damned 
while still on earth because of the enormity of the sins he had 
committed. In the impossibility of convincing him by reasonable 
arguments that he could be saved, his physicians accepted his 
delirium and caused an “angel” dressed in white, with a sword in 
its hand, to appear to him, and after a severe exhortation this 
delusive vision announced that his sins had been remitted. 

From this very example, we see the next step: representation 
within the image is not enough; it is also necessary to continue the 
delirious discourse. For in the patient’s insane words there is a 
voice that speaks; it obeys its own grammar, it articulates a 
meaning. Grammar and meaning must be maintained in such a 
way that the representation of the hallucination in reality does 


198 


not seem like the transition from one register to another, like a 
translation into a new language, with an altered meaning. The 
same language must continue to make itself understood, merely 
bringing a new deductive element to the rigor of its discourse. 
Yet this element is not indifferent; the problem is not to pursue 
the delirium, but by continuing it to bring it to an end. It must 
be led to a state of paroxysm and crisis in which, without any 
addition of a foreign element, it is confronted by itself and forced 
to argue against the demands of its own truth. The real and 
perceptual discourse that prolongs the delirious language of the 
images must therefore, without escaping the latter’s laws, 
without departing from its sovereignty, exercise a positive 
function in relation to it; it tightens that language around its 
essential element; if it represents it at the risk of confirming it, it 
is in order to dramatize it. The case is cited of a sufferer who 
thought that he was dead, and was really dying from not eating; 
“a group of people who had made themselves pale and were 
dressed like the dead, entered his room, set up a table, brought 
food, and began to eat and drink before the bed. The starving 
‘dead man’ looked at them; they were astonished that he stayed 
in bed; they persuaded him that dead people eat at least as much 
as living ones. He readily accommodated himself to this idea.”18 
It is within a continuous discourse that the elements of delirium, 
coming into contradiction, bring on the crisis. A crisis which is, 
in a very ambiguous manner, both medical and theatrical; a 
