
294 


violence, the limitless application of the right of death—this 
entire society, whose only link is the very rejection of a link, 
appears to be a dismissal of nature—the only cohesion asked of 
individuals is intended to protect, not a natural existence, but the 
free exercise of sovereignty over and against nature. 4 The 
relation established by Rousseau is precisely reversed; sovereignty 
no longer transposes the natural existence; the latter is only an 
object for the sovereign, which permits him to measure his total 
liberty. Followed to its logical conclusion, desire leads only in 
appearance to the rediscovery of nature. Actually, for Sade there 
is no return to the natal terrain, no hope that the first rejection of 
social order may surreptitiously become the re-established order 
of happiness, through a dialectic of nature renouncing and thus 
confirming itself. The solitary madness of desire that still for 
Hegel, as for the eighteenth-century philosophers, plunges man 
into a natural world that is immediately resumed in a social 
world, for Sade merely casts man into a void that dominates 
nature in a total absence of proportion and community, into the 
endlessly repeated nonexistence of gratification. The night of 
madness is thus limitless; what might have been supposed to be 
man’s violent nature was only the infinity of non-nature. 

Here is the source of Sade’s great monotony: as he advances, 
the settings dissolve; the surprises, the incidents, the pathetic or 
dramatic links of the scenes vanish. What was still vicissitude in 
Justine —an event experienced, hence new—becomes in Juliette a 
sovereign game, always triumphant, without negativity, and 
whose perfection is such that its novelty can only be its similarity 
to itself. As with Goya, there are no longer any backgrounds for 
these meticulous Disparates. And yet in this absence of decor, 
which can as easily be total night as absolute day (there are no 
shadows in Sade), we advance slowly toward a goal: the death of 
Justine. Her innocence had exhausted even the desire to torment 
it. We cannot say that crime had not overcome her virtue; we 


295 



must say inversely that her natural virtue had brought her to the 
point of having exhausted all the possible means of being an 
object for crime. And at this point, when crime can do nothing 
more than drive her from the domain of its sovereignty (Juliette 
expels her from the Chateau de Noirceuil), Nature in her turn, so 
long dominated, scorned, profaned,5 submits entirely to that 
which contradicted her: Nature in turn enters madness, and 
there, in an instant, but for an instant only, restores her 
omnipotence. The storm that is unleashed, the lightning that 
strikes and consumes Justine, is Nature become criminal 
subjectivity. This death that seems to escape from the insane 
domain of Juliette belongs to Nature more profoundly than any 
other; the night of storm, of thunder and lightning, is a sufficient 
sign that Nature is lacerating herself, that she has reached the 
extreme point of her dissension, and that she is revealing in this 
golden flash a sovereignty which is both herself and something 
quite outside herself: the sovereignty of a mad heart that has 
attained, in its solitude, the limits of the world that wounds it, 
that turns it against itself and abolishes it at the moment when to 
have mastered it so well gives it the right to identify itself with 
that world. That lightning-flash which Nature drew from herself 
in order to strike Justine was identical with the long existence of 
Juliette, who would also disappear in solitude, leaving no trace or 
corpse or anything upon which Nature could claim her due. The 
nothingness of unreason, in which the language of Nature had 
died forever, has become a violence of Nature and against 
Nature, to the point of the savage abolition of itself.6 

For Sade as for Goya, unreason continues to watch by night; 
but in this vigil it joins with fresh powers. The non-being it once 
was now becomes the power to annihilate. Through Sade and 
Goya, the Western world received the possibility of transcending 
its reason in violence, and of recovering tragic experience beyond 
the promises of dialectic. 


296 


After Sade and Goya, and since them, unreason has belonged 
to whatever is decisive, for the modern world, in any work of art: 
that is, whatever any work of art contains that is both murderous 
and constraining. 

The madness of Tasso, the melancholia of Swift, the delirium 
of Rousseau belong to their works, just as these works belong to 
their authors. Here in the texts, there in the lives of the men, the 
same violence spoke, or the same bitterness; visions certainly 
were exchanged; language and delirium interlaced. But further, 
the work of art and madness, in classical experience, were more 
profoundly united at another level: paradoxically, at the point 
where they limited one another. For there existed a region where 
madness challenged the work of art, reduced it ironically, made 
of its iconographic landscape a pathological world of 
hallucinations; that language which was delirium was not a work 
of art. And conversely, delirium was robbed of its meager truth 
