not a passive element subject to the fluctuations of wealth, but a 
force which directly contributed to the economic situation, to the 
production of wealth, since it is man’s labor which creates—or at 
least transmits, shifts, and multiplies—wealth. The “Poor Man” 
was a vague notion in which were combined that wealth which is 
Man and the state of Need which is acknowledged as essential to 
humanity. Indeed, between Poverty and Population, there is a 
rigorously inverse relation. 

Physiocrats and economists are in agreement on this. 
Population is in itself one of the elements of wealth; it forms, 
indeed, its certain and inexhaustible source. For Francis 
Quesnay and his disciples, man is the essential mediation 
between the land and wealth: “A man is worth as much as the land , 
according to an old proverb. If a man is valueless, so is the land. 
With men, one doubles the land one possesses; one clears it, one 
acquires it. God alone could from the earth make a man, whereas 
all over the world it has been possible to have land by means of 
men, or at least the product of the land, which comes down to 
the same thing. It follows that the first good is the possession of 
men, and the second, of the land.”7 


242 


For the economists, the population is a good quite as essential, 
if not more so, since in their view wealth is created not only in 
agricultural labor, but in every industrial transformation, and 
even in commercial circulation. Wealth is linked to a labor 
actually effected by man: “The State having real wealth only in 
the annual products of its lands and in the industry of its 
inhabitants, its wealth will be at a maximum when the product of 
each acre of land and of the industry of each individual is raised 
to its maximum.”8 Paradoxically, a population will be precious in 
proportion to its numbers, since it will afford industry a cheap 
labor force, which, by lowering the cost price, will permit a 
development of production and of commerce. In this infinitely 
open labor market, the “fundamental price”—what corresponds 
for Turgot to the worker’s subsistence—and the price 
determined by supply and demand ultimately coincide. A nation 
will therefore be favored in commercial competition to the 
degree that it has at its disposal the greatest potential wealth of a 
numerous population. 

Confinement was a gross error, and an economic mistake: 
poverty was to be suppressed by removing and maintaining by 
charity a poor population. Actually, it was poverty that was being 
artificially masked; and a part of the population was being really 
suppressed, wealth being always constant. Was the intention to 
help the poor escape their provisional indigence? They were kept 
from doing so: the labor market was limited, which was all the 
more dangerous in that this was precisely a period of crisis. On 
the contrary, the high cost of products should have been palliated 
by a cheap labor force, their scarcity being compensated by a new 
industrial and agricultural effort. The only reasonable remedy: to 
restore this entire population to the circuit of production, in 
order to distribute it to the points where the labor force was 
rarest. To utilize the poor, vagabonds, exiles, and emigres of all 
kinds, was one of the secrets of wealth, in the competition 


243 



among nations: “What is the best means of weakening the 
neighboring states whose power and industry tend to overshadow 
us?” asked Josias Tucker apropos of the emigration of the 
Protestants. “Is it to force their subjects to remain at home by 
refusing to receive and incorporate them among us, or is it to 
attract them to us by good wages, allowing them to enjoy the 
advantages of the other citizens?” 

Confinement is open to criticism because of the repercussions 
it can have on the labor market; but still more, because it 
constitutes, and with it the entire enterprise of traditional 
charity, a dangerous financing. Like the Middle Ages, the 
classical period had always sought to provide aid to the poor by 
the system of foundations. This meant that a share of land 
capital or income was thereby immobilized. And for good, since, 
in the just concern to avoid the commercialization of the charity 
enterprises, all juridical measures were taken so that these goods 
would never return to circulation. But with the passage of time, 
their utility diminished; the economic situation changed, poverty 
altered its aspect: “Society does not always have the same needs; 
nature and the distribution of property, the division between the 
different orders of the people, the opinions, the customs, the 
general occupations of the nation or of its different portions, the 
climate itself, the diseases and other accidents of human life 
undergo a continual variation; new needs are born; others cease 
to make themselves felt.”9 The definitive character of the 
foundation was in contradiction to the variable and indefinite 
rate of the accidental needs which it was supposed to satisfy. 
Without the wealth which it immobilized being restored to 
circulation, new wealth had to be created as new needs appeared. 
The share of funds and revenues which were set aside constantly 
increased, thereby diminishing the productive share. Which 
inevitably led to a greater poverty, hence to more numerous 
foundations. And the process could extend indefinitely. The 
