nature). This contradiction thus appears as the reason of 
unreason, in a double sense: it withholds unreason’s causes, and 
at the same time conceals the principle of its suppression. It must 
be noted, however, that these themes are not contemporary with 
the classical period for its entire duration. Although they are 
organized around the same experience of unreason, they follow 
after the themes of theatrical representation; and their 
appearance marks the moment when the debate on being and 
illusion begins to yield to a problematics of nature. Games of 
theatrical illusion lose their meaning, and the artificial 
techniques of iconographic representation are replaced by the 
simple and confident act of a natural reduction. And this in an 
ambiguous direction, since it is as much a question of reduction 
by nature as of a reduction to nature. 

The return to the immediate is the therapeutics par excellence , 
because it is the rigorous refusal of therapeutics: it cures insofar 
as it is a disregard of all cures. It is in man’s passivity with regard 
to himself, in the silence he imposes on his art and his artifices, 
that nature engages in an activity which is exactly reciprocal to 
renunciation. For, to consider it more closely, this passivity of 
man is real activity; when man entrusts himself to medicine, he 
escapes the law of labor that nature itself imposes on him; he 
sinks into the world of artifice, and of anti-nature, of which his 
madness is only one of the manifestations; it is by ignoring this 
disease and resuming his place in the activity of natural beings 
that man in an apparent passivity (which is in fact only an 
industrious fidelity) succeeds in being cured. Thus Bernadin de 


202 



Saint-Pierre explains how he cured himself of a “strange disease,” 
in which, “like Oedipus, he saw two suns.” Medicine had offered 
him its succor, and had informed him that “the seat of his disease 
was in the nerves.” In vain he applied the most highly prized 
medicaments; he soon noticed that the physicians themselves 
were killed by their own remedies: “It was to Jean-Jacques 
Rousseau that I owed my return to health. I had read, in his 
immortal writings, among other natural truths, that man is made 
to work, not to meditate. Until that time I had exercised my soul 
and rested my body; I changed my ways; I exercised my body and 
rested my soul. I gave up most books; I turned my eyes to the 
works of nature, which addressed all my senses in a language that 
neither time nor nations can corrupt. My history and my 
newspapers were the plants of the field and forest; it was not my 
thoughts that struggled to them, as in the system of men, but 
their thoughts that came to me in a thousand agreeable 
