
Necessary because it could not be suppressed, this role of 
poverty was necessary too because it made wealth possible. 
Because they labor and consume little, those who are in need 
permit a nation to enrich itself, to set a high value on its fields, 
its colonies, and its mines, to manufacture products which will be 
sold the world over; in short, a people would be poor which had 
no paupers. Indigence becomes an indispensable element in the 
State. In it is concealed the secret but also the real life of a 
society. The poor constitute the basis and the glory of nations. 
And their poverty, which cannot be suppressed, must be exalted 
and revered: “My purpose is merely to attract a share of that 
vigilant attention [that of the government] to the suffering 
portion of the People ...; the succor it is owed derives essentially 
from the honor and the prosperity of an Empire, of which the 
Poor are everywhere the firmest support, for a sovereign cannot 
preserve and extend his realm without favoring the population, 
the cultivation of the Land, the Arts, and commerce; and the 
Poor are the necessary agents of these great powers which 

establish the true strength of a People.Here is an entire moral 
rehabilitation of the Pauper, which designates, at a deeper level, 
a social and economic reintegration of his role and character. In 
the mercantilist economy, the Pauper, being neither producer 
nor consumer, had no place: idle, vagabond, unemployed, he 
belonged only to confinement, a measure by which he was exiled 
and as it were abstracted from society. With the nascent industry 
which needs manpower, he once again plays a part in the body of 
the nation. 

Thus, economic thought elaborates on new foundations the 


241 


notion of poverty. There had been the entire Christian tradition 
for which the Poor Man had had a real and concrete existence, a 
presence of flesh and blood: an always individual countenance of 
need, the symbolic passage of God in man’s image. The 
abstraction of confinement had removed the Poor Man, had 
identified him with other figures, enveloping him in an ethical 
condemnation, but had not dissociated him from his features. 
The eighteenth century discovered that “the Poor” did not exist 
as a concrete and final reality; that in them, two realities of 
different natures had too long been confused. 

On one hand, there was Poverty, scarcity of commodities and 
money, an economic situation linked to the state of commerce, 
of agriculture, of industry. On the other, there was Population'. 
