longer read in an immediate perception, the figure no longer 
speaks for itself; between the knowledge which animates it and 
the form into which it is transposed, a gap widens. It is free for 
the dream. One book bears witness to meaning s proliferation at 
the end of the Gothic world, the Speculum humanae Salvationist 
which, beyond all the correspondences established by the 
patristic tradition, elaborates, between the Old and the New 
Testament, a symbolism not on the order of Prophecy, but 
deriving from an equivalence of imagery. The Passion of Christ 
is not prefigured only by the sacrifice of Abraham; it is 
surrounded by all the glories of torture and its innumerable 
dreams; Tubal the blacksmith and Isaiah’s wheel take their places 
around the Cross, forming beyond all the lessons of the sacrifice 
the fantastic tableau of savagery, of tormented bodies, and of 
suffering. Thus the image is burdened with supplementary 
meanings, and forced to express them. And dreams, madness, 
the unreasonable can also slip into this excess of meaning. The 
symbolic figures easily become nightmare silhouettes. Witness 
that old image of wisdom so often translated, in German 
engravings, by a long-necked bird whose thoughts, rising slowly 
from heart to head, have time to be weighed and reflected on; a 
symbol whose values are blunted by being overemphasized: the 
long path of reflection becomes in the image the alembic of a 
subtle learning, an instrument which distills quintessences. The 
neck of the Gutemensch is endlessly elongated, the better to 
illustrate, beyond wisdom, all the real mediations of knowledge; 
and the symbolic man becomes a fantastic bird whose 
disproportionate neck folds a thousand times upon itself—an 
insane being, halfway between animal and thing, closer to the 
charms of an image than to the rigor of a meaning. This 
symbolic wisdom is a prisoner of the madness of dreams. 


30 



A fundamental conversion of the world of images: the 
constraint of a multiplied meaning liberates that world from the 
control of form. So many diverse meanings are established 
beneath the surface of the image that it presents only an 
enigmatic face. And its power is no longer to teach but to 
fascinate. Characteristic is the evolution of the famous gryllos 
already familiar to the Middle Ages in the English psalters, and 
at Chartres and Bourges. It taught, then, how the soul of 
desiring man had become a prisoner of the beast; these grotesque 
faces set in the bellies of monsters belonged to the world of the 
great Platonic metaphor and denounced the spirit’s corruption in 
the folly of sin. But in the fifteenth century the gryllos, image of 
human madness, becomes one of the preferred figures in the 
countless Temptations. What assails the hermit’s tranquillity is 
not objects of desire, but these hermetic, demented forms which 
have risen from a dream, and remain silent and furtive on the 
surface of a world. In the Lisbon Temptation , facing Saint 
Anthony sits one of these figures born of madness, of its 
solitude, of its penitence, of its privations; a wan smile lights this 
bodiless face, the pure presence of anxiety in the form of an agile 
grimace. Now it is exactly this nightmare silhouette that is at 
once the subject and object of the temptation; it is this figure 
which fascinates the gaze of the ascetic—both are prisoners of a 
kind of mirror interrogation, which remains unanswered in a 
silence inhabited only by the monstrous swarm that surrounds 
them. The gryllos no longer recalls man, by its satiric form, to 
his spiritual vocation forgotten in the folly of desire. It is 
madness become Temptation; all it embodies of the impossible, 
the fantastic, the inhuman, all that suggests the unnatural, the 
writhing of an insane presence on the earth’s surface-all this is 
precisely what gives the gryllos its strange power. The freedom, 
however frightening, of his dreams, the hallucinations of his 
madness, have more power of attraction for fifteenth-century 
man than the desirable reality of the flesh. 


31 



What then is this fascination which now operates through the 
images of madness? 

First, man finds in these fantastic figures one of the secrets 
and one of the vocations of his nature. In the thought of the 
Middle Ages, the legions of animals, named once and for all by 
Adam, symbolically bear the values of humanity. But at the 
beginning of the Renaissance, the relations with animality are 
reversed; the beast is set free; it escapes the world of legend and 
moral illustration to acquire a fantastic nature of its own. And by 
an astonishing reversal, it is now the animal that will stalk man, 
capture him, and reveal him to his own truth. Impossible 
animals, issuing from a demented imagination, become the 
secret nature of man; and when on the Last Day sinful man 
appears in his hideous nakedness, we see that he has the 
monstrous shape of a delirious animal; these are the screech owls 
whose toad bodies combine, in Thierry Bouts’s Hell , with the 
nakedness of the damned; these are Stephan Lochner’s winged 
insects with cats’ heads, sphinxes with beetles’ wing cases, birds 
whose wings are as disturbing and as avid as hands; this is the 
great beast of prey with knotty fingers that figures in Matthias 
Griinewald’s Temptation. Animality has escaped domestication 
by human symbols and values; and it is animality that reveals the 
