immorality: “these guarded asylums ... are retreats as useful as 
they are necessary.... The sight of these shadowy places and the 
guilty creatures they contain is well calculated to preserve from 
the same acts of just reprobation the deviations of a too 
licentious youth; it is thus prudent of mothers and fathers to 
familiarize their children at an early age with these horrible and 


218 



detestable places, where shame and turpitude fetter crime, where 
man, corrupted in his essence, often loses forever the rights he 
had acquired in society.” 

Such are the dreams by which morality, in complicity with 
medicine, tried to defend itself against the dangers contained but 
insufficiently restricted by confinement. These same dangers, at 
the same time, fascinated men's imaginations and their desires. 
Morality dreams of exorcising them, but there is something in 
man which makes him dream of experiencing them, or at least of 
approaching them and releasing their hallucinations. The horror 
that now surrounded the fortresses of confinement also exercised 
an irresistible attraction. Such nights were peopled with 
inaccessible pleasures; such corrupt and ravaged faces became 
masks of voluptuousness; against these dark landscapes appeared 
forms—pains and delights—which echoed Hieronymus Bosch 
and his delirious gardens. The secrets that escaped from the 
chateau in the One Hundred and Twenty Days of Sodom have been 
murmured ever since: “There, the most infamous excesses are 
committed upon the very person of the prisoner; we hear of 
certain vices practiced frequently, notoriously, and even publicly 
in the common room of the prison, vices which the propriety of 
modern times does not permit us to name. We are told that 
numerous prisoners, simillimi feminis mores stuprati et 
constupratores\ that they return from this obscure, forbidden place 
covered over with their own and others’ debaucheries, lost to all 
shame and ready to commit all sorts of crimes.”7 And La 
Rochefoucauld-Liancourt in his turn evoked those figures of Old 
Women and Young Women in the correction wards of La 
Salpetriere, who from generation to generation communicate the 
same secrets and the same pleasures: “The correction ward is the 
place of greatest punishment for the House, containing when we 
visited it forty-seven girls, most of them very young, more 
thoughtless than guilty.... And always this confusion of ages, 


219 


this shocking mixture of frivolous girls with hardened women 
who can teach them only the art of the most unbridled 
corruption.” For a long time these visions would prowl insistently 
through the nights of the eighteenth century. For a moment they 
would be picked out by the pitiless light of Sade’s work and 
placed by it in the rigorous geometry of Desire. They would be 
taken up again and wrapped in the murky light of Goya’s 
Madhouse , or the twilight that surrounds the Quinta del Sordo. 
How closely the faces of the Disparates resemble them! A whole 
imaginary landscape reappears, conveyed by the Great Fear 
confinement now inspires. 

What the classical period had confined was not only an 
abstract unreason which mingled madmen and libertines, 
invalids, and criminals, but also an enormous reservoir of the 
fantastic, a dormant world of monsters supposedly engulfed in 
the darkness of Hieronymus Bosch which had once spewed them 
forth. One might say that the fortresses of confinement added to 
their social role of segregation and purification a quite opposite 
cultural function. Even as they separated reason from unreason 
on society’s surface, they preserved in depth the images where 
they mingled and exchanged properties. The fortresses of 
confinement functioned as a great, long silent memory; they 
maintained in the shadows an iconographic power that men 
might have thought was exorcised; created by the new classical 
order, they preserved, against it and against time, forbidden 
figures that could thus be transmitted intact from the sixteenth 
to the nineteenth century. In this abolished time, the Brocken 
joined Dulle Griet in the same imaginary landscape, and 
Noirceuil, the great legend of the Marechal de Rais. 
Confinement allowed, indeed called for, this resistance of 
imagery. 

But the images liberated at the end of the eighteenth century 
were not identical at all points with those the seventeenth 
century had tried to eliminate. Something had happened, in the 


220 



darkness, which detached them from that secret world where the 
Renaissance, after the Middle Ages, had found them; they had 
lodged in the hearts, in the desires, in the imaginations of men; 
and instead of manifesting to sight the abrupt presence of the 
insane, they seethed as the strange contradiction of human 
appetites: the complicity of desire and murder, of cruelty and the 
longing to suffer, of sovereignty and slavery, of insult and 
