disunited, remedies are necessary which calm their movement 
and return them to their natural situation, such things as give the 
soul a sweet and moderate feeling of pleasure: agreeable odors, 
walks in delightful spots, the sight of persons who are in the 
habit of providing diversion, and Music.” This firm gentleness, a 
proper gravity, ultimately a vivacity intended only to protect the 
body—all these are means to consolidate, within the organism, 
the fragile elements connecting body and soul. 

But there is probably no better fortifying procedure than the 
use of the substance which is both the most solid and the most 
docile, the most resistant but the most pliable in the hands of the 
man who knows how to forge it to his purposes: iron. Iron 
unites, in its privileged nature, all those qualities that quickly 


172 


become contradictory when they are isolated. Nothing resists 
better, nothing can better obey; it is a gift of nature, but it is also 
at the disposal of all of man s techniques. How could man help 
nature and lend it an abundance of strength by a surer means— 
that is, one closer to nature and more obedient to man—than by 
the application of iron? The old example of Dioscorides is always 
cited, who gave to the inertia of water the vigorous virtues 
foreign to it by plunging into it a bar of red-hot iron. The ardor 
of fire, the calm mobility of water, the rigor of a metal treated 
until it had become supple—all these elements, united, conferred 
upon water powers of reinforceent, of vivification, of 
consolidation, which it could transmit to the organism. But iron 
is efficacious even aside from any preparation; Sydenham 
recommends it in its simplest form, by the direct absorption of 
iron filings. Whytt instances a man who, in order to cure himself 
of a weakness of the stomach nerves involving a permanent state 
of hypochondria, took 230 grains of iron every day. This was 
because to all its virtues, iron added the remarkable property of 
transmitting itself directly, without intermediary or 
transformation. What it communicated was not its substance but 
its strength; paradoxically, though itself so resistant, it 
immediately dissolved in the organism, depositing there only its 
qualities, without rust or waste. It is evident here that an imagery 
of wonder-working iron governs discursive thought and prevails 
over observation itself. If experiments were made, it was not to 
reveal a positive sequence of effects, but to emphasize this 
immediate communication of qualities. Wright fed a dog Mars 
salts; he observed that an hour later the chyle, if mixed with 
tincture of nut gall, did not display that purple color it invariably 
assumed if the iron had been absorbed. This must have been 
because the iron, without mixing with the digestion, without 
passing into the blood, without penetrating the organism 
substantially, fortified the membranes and fibers directly. More 
than an observed effect, the consolidation of the spirits and the 


173 



nerves appears rather as an operative metaphor which implies a 
transfer of strength without any discursive dynamics. Strength is 
supplied by contact, exclusive of any exchange or substance, any 
communication of movements. 

2. Purification. Clogging of the viscera, ebullition of false 
ideas, fermentation of vapors, violence, corruption of liquids and 
spirits—madness elicits an entire series of therapeutics, each of 
which can be attached to the identical operation of purification. 

The ideal was a sort of total purification: the simplest but also 
the most impossible of cures. It would consist of substituting for 
the melancholic’s overcharged, thick blood, encumbered with 
bitter humors, a light, clear blood whose new movement would 
dissipate the delirium. In 1662 Moritz Hoffman suggested blood 
transfusion as a remedy for melancholia. Some years later, the 
idea had attained sufficient currency for the Philosophical 
Society of London to plan a series of experiments upon the 
subjects confined in Bedlam; Allen, the doctor entrusted with 
the enterprise, refused. But Jean-Baptiste Denis tried it upon one 
of his patients stricken with amorous melancholia; he drew off 
ten ounces of blood, which he replaced with a slightly smaller 
quantity taken from the femoral artery of a calf; the following 
day he began again, but this time the operation involved only a 
few ounces. The patient became calm; the following day his 
mind cleared; he was soon entirely cured; “all the professors of 
the Academy of Surgeons attested it.” The technique, however, 
was quickly abandoned, despite a few later attempts. 

The preferred medications were those that forestalled 
corruption. We know “as a result of more than three thousand 
years of experience that Myrrh and Aloes preserve corpses.”2 Are 
not these deteriorations of bodies of the same nature as those 
that accompany the diseases of the humors? Then nothing would 
be more recommendable against the vapors than products like 
myrrh or aloes, and especially the famous elixir of Paracelsus. But 


174 


