86 



dialectic whose movement explains all these “inhuman” practices 
of confinement, the free animality of madness was tamed only by 
such discipline whose meaning was not to raise the bestial to the 
human, but to restore man to what was purely animal within 
him. Madness discloses a secret of animality which is its own 
truth, and in which, in some way, it is reabsorbed. Toward the 
middle of the eighteenth century, a farmer in the north of 
Scotland had his hour of fame. He was said to possess the art of 
curing insanity. Pinel notes in passing that this Gregory had the 
physique of a Hercules: “His method consisted in forcing the 
insane to perform the most difficult tasks of farming, in using 
them as beasts of burden, as servants, in reducing them to an 
ultimate obedience with a barrage of blows at the least act of 
revolt.” In the reduction to animality, madness finds both its 
truth and its cure; when the madman has become a beast, this 
presence of the animal in man, a presence which constituted the 
scandal of madness, is eliminated: not that the animal is silenced, 
but man himself is abolished. In the human being who has 
become a beast of burden, the absence of reason follows wisdom 
and its order: madness is then cured, since it is alienated in 
something which is no less than its truth. 

A moment would come when, from this animality of madness, 
would be deduced the idea of a mechanistic psychology, and the 
notion that the forms of madness can be referred to the great 
structures of animal life. But in the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries, the animality that lends its face to madness in no way 
stipulates a determinist nature for its phenomena. On the 
contrary, it locates madness in an area of unforeseeable freedom 
where frenzy is unchained; if determinism can have any effect on 
it, it is in the form of constraint, punishment, or discipline. 
Through animality, madness does not join the great laws of 
nature and of life, but rather the thousand forms of a bestiary. 
But unlike the one popular in the Middle Ages, which 
illustrated, in so many symbolic visages, the metamorphoses of 


87 



evil, this was an abstract bestiary; here evil no longer assumed its 
fantastic body; here we apprehend only its most extreme form, 
the truth of the beast which is a truth without content. Evil is 
freed from all that its wealth of iconographic fauna could do, to 
preserve only a general power of intimidation: the secret danger 
of an animality that lies in wait and, all at once, undoes reason in 
violence and truth in the madmans frenzy. Despite the 
contemporary effort to constitute a positivist zoology, this 
obsession with an animality perceived as the natural locus of 
madness continued to people the hell of the classical age. It was 
this obsession that created the imagery responsible for all the 
practices of confinement and the strangest aspects of its savagery. 

It has doubtless been essential to Western culture to link, as it 
has done, its perception of madness to the iconographic forms of 
the relation of man to beast. From the start, Western culture has 
not considered it evident that animals participate in the 
plenitude of nature, in its wisdom and its order: this idea was a 
late one and long remained on the surface of culture; perhaps it 
has not yet penetrated very deeply into the subterranean regions 
of the imagination. In fact, on close examination, it becomes 
evident that the animal belongs rather to an anti-nature, to a 
negativity that threatens order and by its frenzy endangers the 
positive wisdom of nature. The work of Lautreamont bears 
witness to this. Why should the fact that Western man has lived 
for two thousand years on his definition as a rational animal 
necessarily mean that he has recognized the possibility of an 
order common to reason and to animality? Why should he have 
necessarily designated, by this definition, the way in which he 
inserts himself in natural positivity? Independently of what 
Aristotle really meant, may we not assume that for the West this 
“rational animal” has long been the measure of the way in which 
reason s freedom functioned in the locus of unreason, diverging 
from it until it constituted its opposite term? From the moment 
philosophy became anthropology, and man sought to recognize 


88 



himself in a natural plenitude, the animal lost its power of 
negativity, in order to become, between the determinism of 
nature and the reason of man, the positive form of an evolution. 
The formula of the “rational animal” has utterly changed its 
meaning: the unreason it suggested as the origin of all possible 
reason has entirely disappeared. Henceforth madness must obey 
the determinism of man perceived as a natural being in his very 
animality. In the classical age, if it is true that the scientific and 
medical analysis of madness, as we shall see below, sought to 
establish it within this natural mechanism, the real practices that 
concern the insane bear sufficient witness to the fact that 
madness was still contained in the anti-natural violence of 
animality. 

