(Do you come to bear me off into eternal night?) 

This is the moment when it is revealed that the images of 
madness are only dream and error, and if the sufferer who is 
blinded by them appeals to them, it is only to disappear with 
them in the annihilation to which they are fated. 

A second time, then, we pass through a circle of night. But we 
are not thereby restored to the daylight reality of the world. We 
accede, beyond what is manifested in madness, to delirium , to 
that essential and constitutive structure which had secretly 
sustained madness from the first. This delirium has a name, 
Hermione; Hermione who no longer reappears as a hallucinatory 
vision, but as the ultimate truth of madness. It is significant that 
Hermione intervenes at this very moment of the frenzy: not 
among the Eumenides, nor ahead of them—to guide them; but 
behind and separated from them by the night into which they 
have dragged Orestes and in which they themselves are now 
scattered. Hermione intervenes as a figure of delirium, as the 
truth which secretly reigned from the start, and of which the 
Eumenides were ultimately only the servants. Here we are at the 
opposite of Greek tragedy, where the Erinnyes were the final 
destiny and truth which, in the night of time, had awaited the 
hero; his passion was merely their instrument. Here the 


123 



Eumenides are merely figures in the service of delirium, the 
primary and ultimate truth, which was already appearing in 
passion, and now declares itself in its nakedness. This truth rules 
alone, thrusting images away: 

Mais non , retirez-vous, laissez faire Hermione. 

(But no, begone, let Hermione do her work.) 

Hermione, who has always been present from the beginning, 
Hermione who has always lacerated Orestes, destroying his 
reason bit by bit, Hermione for whom he has become “parricide, 
assassin , sacrilege , ” reveals herself finally as the truth and 
culmination of his madness. And delirium, in its rigor, no longer 
has anything to say except to articulate as imminent decision a 
truth long since commonplace and laughable: 

Et je luiporte enfin mon coeur a de'vorer. 

(And I bring her at last my heart to devour.) 
