was to be of great importance for the future, madmen were 
brought under the sway of immediate and unchecked measures 
adopted not even against dangerous criminals, but against 
marauding beasts. The Law of August 16-24, 1790, “entrusts to 
the vigilance and authority of the municipal bodies ... the care of 
obviating and remedying the disagreeable events that may be 
occasioned by madmen set at liberty, and by the wandering of 
vicious and dangerous animals.” The law of July 22, 1791, 
reinforces this arrangement, making families responsible for the 
supervision of the insane, and permitting the municipal 
authorities to take all measures that might prove useful: “The 
relatives of the insane must care for them, prevent them from 
straying, and see that they do not commit offenses or disorders. 
The municipal authority must obviate the inconvenience that 
may result from the negligence with which private persons fulfill 
this duty.” By this detour around their liberation, madmen 


248 



regained, but this time within the law itself, that animal status in 
which confinement had seemed to isolate them; they again 
became wild beasts at the very period when doctors began to 
attribute to them a gentle animality. But even though this legal 
disposition was put in the hands of the authorities, the problems 
were not solved thereby; hospitals for the insane still did not 
exist. 

Countless requests flooded the Ministry of the Interior. 
Delessart answered one of them, for example: “I feel as you do, 
Monsieur, how important it is that we labor without respite 
toward the establishment of houses designed to serve as retreats 
for the unfortunate class of the insane.... With regard to those 
insane persons whom the lack of such an establishment has 
relegated to the various prisons of your department, I do not see 
any other means at present of removing them from those places 
so unsuited to their state, except to transfer them temporarily, if 
possible, to Bicetre. It would therefore be appropriate for the 
Directory to write to the Paris establishment in order to ascertain 
a way to have them admitted to that house, where the costs of 
their upkeep will be paid by your department or by the 
communes where these unfortunates reside, if their families are 
not in a position to assume that expense/’ Bicetre thus became 
the great center to which all the insane were sent, especially once 
Saint-Lazare was closed. The same was true for the women at La 
Salpetriere: in 1792, two hundred madwomen were taken there 
who had been installed five years previously in the former 
novitiate of the Capucines on the Rue Saint-Jacques. But in the 
