
recomposed, the harmonic structure of consonance restoring the 
harmonious functioning of the passions. 

The very use of passion in the therapeutics of madness must 
not be understood as a form of psychological medication. To 
employ passion against dementia is merely to attack the unity of 
soul and body at its most rigorous point, to utilize an event in the 
double system of its effects, and in the immediate 
correspondence of their meaning. To cure madness by passion 
implies that one accepts the reciprocal symbolism of soul and 
body. Fear, in the eighteenth century, was regarded as one of the 
passions most advisable to arouse in madmen. It was considered 
the natural complement of the constraints imposed upon 
maniacs and lunatics; a sort of discipline was even imagined 
which would immediately accompany and compensate every 
attack of anger in a maniac by a reaction of fear: “It is by force 
that the furies of a maniac are overcome; it is by opposing fear to 
anger that anger may be mastered. If the terror of punishment 
and public shame are associated in the mind during attacks of 
anger, one will not appear without the other; the poison and the 
antidote are inseparable.”12 But fear is efficacious not only at the 
level of the effects of the disease; it is the disease itself that fear 
attacks and suppresses. It has, in fact, the property of petrifying 
the operations of the nervous system, somehow congealing its 
too mobile fibers, controlling all their disordered movements; 
“fear being a passion that diminishes the excitation of the brain, 
it can consequently calm its excesses, and especially the irascible 
excitation of maniacs.”!3 

If the fear-anger antithesis is efficacious against manic 
irritation, it can be used inversely against the unmotivated fears 
of melancholics, hypochondriacs, and all those who have a 
lymphatic temperament. Tissot, reviving the traditional idea that 
anger is a discharge of bile, considers that it is useful for 
dissolving the phlegms amassed in the stomach and in the blood. 


191 


By subjecting the nervous fibers to a stronger tension, anger gives 
them more vigor, thus restoring their lost elasticity and 
permitting fear to disappear. The cure by passion is based on a 
constant metaphor of qualities and movements; it always implies 
that they are immediately transferable in their own modality 
from the body to the soul, and vice versa. It must be used, says 
Scheidenmantel in the treatise he devotes to this form of cure, 
“when the cure necessitates in the body changes identical to 
those which this passion produces/’ And it is in this sense that it 
