
frenzy, its essential principle of cohesion. And while Hermann 
Boerhaave still defined melancholia as merely “a long, persistent 
delirium without fever, during which the sufferer is obsessed by 
only one thought,” Dufour, several years later, shifted the weight 
of his definition to “fear and sadness,” which were now supposed 
to explain the partial character of the delirium: “Hence it is that 
melancholies love solitude and shun company; this makes them 
more attached to the object of their delirium or to their 
dominant passion, whatever it may be, while they seem 
indifferent to anything else.” The concept is fixed not by a new 
rigor in observation, nor by a discovery in the realm of causes, 
but by a qualitative transmission proceeding from a cause implied 
in the designation to a significant perception in the effects. 

For a long time—until the beginning of the seventeenth 
century—the discussion of melancholia remained fixed within 
the tradition of the four humors and their essential qualities: 
stable qualities actually inherent in a substance, which alone 
could be considered as their cause. For Jean Fernel, the 
melancholic humor, related to earth and to autumn, is a juice 
“thick in consistency, cold and dry in temperament.” But in the 
first half of the century, a debate began over the origin of 
melancholia: must one necessarily have a melancholic 
temperament to be afflicted with melancholia? Is the 
melancholic humor always cold and dry—is it never warm, or 
humid? Is it the substance which acts, or the qualities which are 
transmitted? The results of this long debate may be summarized 
as follows: 

1. The causality of substances is increasingly replaced by a 
movement of qualities , which, without any vehicular means, are 
immediately transmitted from body to soul, from humor to ideas, 
from organs to conduct. Thus, for Duncan’s Apologist the best 
proof that the melancholic juice produces melancholia is that in 
it one finds the very qualities of the disease: “The melancholic 
juice possesses to a far greater degree the conditions necessary to 


130 



produce melancholia than your fiery angers; since by its coldness, 
it diminishes the quantity of spirits; by its dryness, it renders 
them capable of preserving for a long time the type of a strong 
and persistent imagination; and by its blackness, it deprives them 
of their natural clarity and subtlety.”3 

2. There is, besides this mechanics of qualities, a dynamics 
