internal movements combined with a certain manner of investing 
it with moral values. The development is completed, the work 
done on the level of this ethical perception. In this perception the 
ever pliant images of medical theory are inflected and altered; in 
it, too, the great moral themes are formulated and gradually alter 
their initial aspect. 

This penetrable body must, however, be a continuous body. 
The dispersion of the disease through the organs is only the 
reverse of a movement of propagation which permits it to pass 
from one to another and to affect them all in succession. If the 
body of the hypochondriac or the hysteric is a porous body, 
separated from itself, distended by the invasion of disease, this 
invasion can be effected only by means of a certain spatial 
continuity. The body in which the disease circulates must have 
other properties than the body in which the sufferer s dispersed 
symptoms appear. 

The problem haunted eighteenth-century medicine, and was 
to make hypochondria and hysteria diseases of the “nervous 
type”; that is, idiopathic diseases of the general agency of all the 
sympathies. 

The nervous fiber is endowed with remarkable properties, 
which permit it to integrate the most heterogeneous elements. Is 
it not astonishing that, responsible for transmitting the most 
diverse impressions, the nerves should be of the same nature 
everywhere, and in every organ? “The nerve whose expansion at 
the back of the eye makes it possible to receive the impression of 
so subtle a matter as light; the nerve which, in the organ of 
hearing, becomes sensitive to the vibrations of sonorous bodies, 
differs no whit in nature from those which serve the grosser 


161 



sensations such as touch, taste, and odor.” This identity of 
nature, in different functions, assures the possibility of 
communication between the most distant organs, and those most 
dissimilar physiologically: “This homogeneity in the nerves of 
the animal, combined with the numerous communications that 
all maintain with each other ... establishes among the organs a 
harmony that often makes one or several parts participate in the 
affections of those which are injured.”! - But what is still more 
admirable, a nervous fiber can transmit simultaneously the 
stimulus of a voluntary movement and the impression left on the 
organ by the senses. Simon-Andre Tissot conceived this double 
function of one and the same fiber as the combination of an 
undulatory movement for voluntary stimulus (“this is the 
movement of a fluid enclosed in a malleable container, in a 
bladder, for example, that when I press it would eject liquid 
through a tube”) and a corpuscular movement for sensation (“this 
is the movement of a succession of ivory balls”). Thus sensation 
and movement can be produced at the same time in the same 
nerve: any tension and any relaxation in the fiber will alter both 
movements and sensations, as we can observe in all nervous 
diseases. 

And yet, despite all these unifying virtues of the nervous 
system, is it certain that we can explain, by the real network of its 
fibers, the cohesion of such diverse disorders as those which 
characterize hysteria or hypochondria? How conceive the liaison 
among the signs that from one part of the body to the other 
betray the presence of a nervous affection? How explain, and by 
tracing what line of connection, that in certain “delicate and 
highly sensitive” women a heady perfume or the too vivid 
description of a tragic event or even the sight of a combat 
produces such an impression that they “fall into syncopes or 
suffer convulsions”? One seeks in vain: no precise liaison of the 
nerves; no path proceeding from the original cause; but only a 


162 


remote, indirect action which is rather on the order of a 
physiological solidarity. This is because the different parts of the 
body possess a “very determined faculty, which is either general 
and extends throughout the entire system of animal economy, or 
particular and influences certain parts principally.” This very 
distinct property of both “the faculty of feeling and that of 
moving” which permits the organs to communicate with each 
other and to suffer together, to react to a stimulus, however 
distant—is sympathy. As a matter of fact, Whytt succeeded 
neither in isolating sympathy in the ensemble of the nervous 
system, nor in defining it in relation to sensibility and to 
movement Sympathy exists in the organs only insofar as it is 
received there through the intermediary of the nerves; it is the 
more marked in proportion to their mobility, and at the same 
time it is one of the forms of sensibility: “All sympathy, all 
consensus presupposes sentiment and consequently can exist only 
by the mediation of the nerves, which are the only instruments 
by which sensation operates.”!^ But the nervous system is no 
longer invoked here to explain the exact transmission of a 
movement or a sensation, but to justify, in its totality and its 
mass, the body’s sensibility with regard to its own phenomena, 
and its own echo across the volumes of its organic space. 

