mad and the sane; but it did not deal with the basic relation 
acknowledged between madness and confinement. Whatever 
attitude is adopted, that, at least, is not in question. Mirabeau, 
the Friend of Man, is as severe about confinement as about the 
confined themselves; in his eyes, no one confined in “the 
celebrated State prisons” is innocent; but his place is not in these 
costly institutions, where he drags out a useless life; why confine 
“daughters of joy who, transported to provincial manufactories, 
could become daughters of labor”? Or “rascals who are waiting 
only for freedom in order to get themselves hanged? Why are 
these people, attached to walking fetters, not employed at those 
tasks which might prove harmful to voluntary workers? They 
would serve as an example ...” Once this entire population was 
removed, who would remain in the houses of confinement? 


237 


Those who could not be placed anywhere else, and who belong 
there by right: “Some prisoners of State whose crimes must not 
be revealed,” to whom may be added “old men who, having 
consumed in debauchery and dissipation all the fruit of their 
life’s labor, and having cherished the ambitious prospect of dying 
in a hospital, come there in peace”; finally, the mad, who must 
wallow somewhere: “These last can vegetate anywhere. ”2 
Mirabeau the younger conducts his demonstration in the 
opposite direction: “I formally defy anyone in the world to prove 
that State prisoners, rascals, libertines, madmen, ruined old men 
constitute I do not say the majority, but the third, the fourth, the 
tenth part of the inhabitants of fortresses, houses of correction, 
and State prisons.” For him the scandal is thus not that the mad 
are mingled with the criminal, but that they do not constitute, 
together, the essential part of the confined population; who then 
can complain of being forced to mix with criminals? Not those 
who have lost their reason forever, but those who in their youth 
spent their time in wildness: “I might ask ... why rascals and 
libertines are mingled together.... I could ask why young men 
with dangerous dispositions are left with men who will rapidly 
lead them to the last degree of corruption.... Finally, if this 
confusion of libertines and villains exists, as is all too true, why 
do we, by this odious, infamous, atrocious combination, make 
ourselves guilty of the most abominable of all crimes, that of 
leading men into crime?” As for madmen, what other fate could 
be desired for them? Neither reasonable enough not to be 
confined, nor wise enough not to be treated as wicked, “it is all 
too true that those who have lost the use of reason must be 

hidden from society.”^ 

We see how the political critique of confinement functioned 
in the eighteenth century. Not in the direction of a liberation of 
the mad; nor can we say that it permitted a more philanthropic 
or a greater medical attention to the insane. On the contrary, it 


238 


linked madness more firmly than ever to confinement, and this 
by a double tie: one which made madness the very symbol of the 
confining power and its absurd and obsessive representative 
within the world of confinement; the other which designated 
madness as the object par excellence of all the measures of 
confinement. Subject and object, image and goal of repression, 
symbol of its blind arbitrariness and justification of all that could 
be reasonable and deserved within it: by a paradoxical circle, 
madness finally appears as the only reason for a confinement 
whose profound unreason it symbolizes. Still so close to this 
eighteenth-century notion, Michelet would formulate it with an 
astonishing rigor; he returns to the very movement of Mirabeau’s 
thought, apropos of the stay the latter made at Vincennes at the 
same time as Sade: 

First, confinement causes alienation: “Prison makes men mad. 
Those found in the Bastille and in Bicetre were stupefied.” 

Secondly, what is most unreasonable, most shameful, most 
profoundly immoral in the tyranny of the eighteenth century is 
represented in the space of confinement, and by a madman: “We 
have seen the frenzies of La Salpetriere. A dreadful lunatic 
existed at Vincennes, the poisonous de Sade, writing in the hope 
of corrupting the time to come.” 

Thirdly, it is for this one madman alone that confinement 
ought to have been reserved, and nothing of the kind was done: 
“He was soon set free, and Mirabeau kept in confinement.” 

Hence an abyss yawns in the middle of confinement; a void 
which isolates madness, denounces it for being irreducible, 
unbearable to reason; madness now appears with what 
distinguishes it from all these confined forms as well. The 
presence of the mad appears as an injustice; but for others. The 
undifferentiated unity of unreason had been broken. Madness 
was individualized, strangely twinned with crime, at least linked 
with it by a proximity which had not yet been called into 


239 

