ships, dependence on the stars, hereditary secrets, estrangement 
from women—the very image of the great, turbulent plain itself 
makes man lose faith in God and all his attachment to his home; 
he is then in the hands of the Devil, in the sea of Satan’s ruses.3 
In the classical period, the melancholy of the English was easily 
explained by the influence of a maritime climate, cold, humidity, 
the instability of the weather; all those fine droplets of water that 
penetrated the channels and fibers of the human body and made 
it lose its firmness, predisposed it to madness. Finally, neglecting 
an immense literature that stretches from Ophelia to the Lorelei, 
let us note only the great half-anthropological, half-cosmological 
analyses of Heinroth, which interpret madness as the 
manifestation in man of an obscure and aquatic element, a dark 
disorder, a moving chaos, the seed and death of all things, which 
opposes the mind’s luminous and adult stability. 

But if the navigation of madmen is linked in the Western 
mind with so many immemorial motifs, why, so abruptly, in the 
fifteenth century, is the theme suddenly formulated in literature 
and iconography? Why does the figure of the Ship of Fools and 
its insane crew all at once invade the most familiar landscapes? 
Why, from the old union of water and madness, was this ship 
born one day, and on just that day? 

Because it symbolized a great disquiet, suddenly dawning on 
the horizon of European culture at the end of the Middle Ages. 
Madness and the madman become major figures, in their 
ambiguity: menace and mockery, the dizzying unreason of the 
world, and the feeble ridicule of men. 

First a whole literature of tales and moral fables, in origin, 
doubtless, quite remote. But by the end of the Middle Ages, it 
bulks large: a long series of “follies” which, stigmatizing vices and 


24 


faults as in the past, no longer attribute them all to pride, to lack 
of charity, to neglect of Christian virtues, but to a sort of great 
unreason for which nothing, in fact, is exactly responsible, but 
which involves everyone in a kind of secret complicity. The 
denunciation of madness {la folie) becomes the general form of 
criticism. In farces and soties, the character of the Madman, the 
Fool, or the Simpleton assumes more and more importance. He 
is no longer simply a ridiculous and familiar silhouette in the 
wings: he stands center stage as the guardian of truth-playing 
here a role which is the complement and converse of that taken 
by madness in the tales and the satires. If folly leads each man 
into a blindness where he is lost, the madman, on the contrary, 
