abstersion, and what is most considerable, prevents the fumes 
from rising to the head and consequently reduces the aches and 
pains customarily suffered there; finally, it affords strength, vigor, 
and cleanliness to the animal spirits, without leaving any great 
impression of heat, even upon the most inured persons who are 

accustomed to use it.” Bitter, but tonic also, is the quinine 
Whytt freely prescribes to persons “whose nervous system is very 
delicate”; it is efficacious against “weakness, discouragement, and 
depression”; two years of a cure consisting only of a tincture of 
quinine, “occasionally discontinued for a month at most,” were 
sufficient to cure a woman suffering from a nervous complaint. 
For delicate persons, quinine must be associated with “a 
bitterness pleasant to the taste”; but if the organism is able to 
withstand stronger attacks, vitriol, mixed with quinine, cannot be 
too strongly recommended. Twenty or thirty drops of elixir of 
vitriol are sovereign. 

Quite naturally, soaps and soap products inevitably enjoy 
privileged effects in this purificatory enterprise. “Soap dissolves 
almost anything that is concrete.”4 Tissot believes that soap can 
be consumed directly, and that it will calm many nervous 
ailments; but more often it is sufficient to consume, first thing in 
the morning, by themselves or with bread, “soapy fruits”—that 
is, cherries, strawberries, currants, figs, oranges, grapes, ripe 
pears, and “other fruits of this nature.” But there are cases where 
the difficulty is so serious, the obstruction so irreducible, that no 


176 


soap can conquer it. Soluble tartar is then recommended. 
Muzzell was the first to have the idea of prescribing tartar for 
“madness and melancholia/’ and published several triumphant 
observations on the subject. Whytt confirms them, and shows at 
the same time that tartar functions as a detersive, since it is 
especially efficacious against obstructive illnesses: “Insofar as I 
have observed it, soluble tartar is more useful in maniac or 
melancholic affections produced by harmful humors amassed in 
the primary canals, than for those produced by a flaw in the 
brain.” Among the dissolvants, Raulin also cites honey, chimney 
soot, Oriental saffron, wood lice, powdered lobster claw, and 
bezoar. 

Halfway between these internal methods of dissolution and 
the external techniques of deflection, we find a series of practices 
of which the most frequent are applications of vinegar. As an 
acid, vinegar dissolves obstructions, destroys foreign bodies as 
they are fermenting. But in external application, it can serve as a 
