when the danger of scandal is past and the honor of families or 
of the Church can no longer be sullied. The Abbe Bargede had 
been confined for a long time; never, despite his requests, had his 
release been authorized; but now old age and infirmity had made 
scandal impossible. “And besides, his paralysis persists,” writes 
d’Argenson; “he can neither write nor sign his name; I think that 
there would be justice and charity in setting him free.” All those 
forms of evil that border on unreason must be thrust into secrecy. 
Classicism felt a shame in the presence of the inhuman that the 
Renaissance had never experienced. 

Yet there is one exception in this consignment to secrecy: that 
which is made for madmen.3 It was doubtless a very old custom 
of the Middle Ages to display the insane. In certain of the 
Narrturmer in Germany, barred windows had been installed 
which permitted those outside to observe the madmen chained 
within. They thus constituted a spectacle at the city gates. The 


79 


strange fact is that this custom did not disappear once the doors 
of the asylums closed, but that on the contrary it then developed, 
assuming in Paris and London almost an institutional character. 
As late as 1815, if a report presented in the House of Commons 
is to be believed, the hospital of Bethlehem exhibited lunatics for 
a penny, every Sunday. Now the annual revenue from these 
exhibitions amounted to almost four hundred pounds; which 
suggests the astonishingly high number of 96,000 visits a year.4 
In France, the excursion to Bicetre and the display of the insane 
remained until the Revolution one of the Sunday distractions for 
the Left Bank bourgeoisie. Mirabeau reports in his Observations 
dun voyageur anglais that the madmen at Bicetre were shown 
“like curious animals, to the first simpleton willing to pay a coin.” 
One went to see the keeper display the madmen the way the 
trainer at the Fair of Saint-Germain put the monkeys through 
their tricks.5 Certain attendants were well known for their ability 
to make the mad perform dances and acrobatics, with a few flicks 
of the whip. The only extenuation to be found at the end of the 
eighteenth century was that the mad were allowed to exhibit the 
mad, as if it were the responsibility of madness to testify to its 
own nature. “Let us not slander human nature. The English 
traveler is right to regard the office of exhibiting madmen as 
beyond the most hardened humanity. We have already said so. 
But all dilemmas afford a remedy. It is the madmen themselves 
who are entrusted in their lucid intervals with displaying their 
companions, who, in their turn, return the favor. Thus the 
keepers of these unfortunate creatures enjoy the profits that the 
spectacle affords, without indulging in a heartlessness to which, 

no doubt, they could never descend.’’^ Here is madness elevated 
to spectacle above the silence of the asylums, and becoming a 
public scandal for the general delight. Unreason was hidden in 
the silence of the houses of confinement, but madness continued 
to be present on the stage of the world—with more commotion 


80 


than ever. It would soon reach, under the Empire, a point that 
had never been attained in the Middle Ages and the 
Renaissance; the strange Brotherhood of the Blue Ship had once 
given performances in which madness was mimed; now it was 
madness itself, madness in flesh and blood, which put on the 
show. Early in the nineteenth century, Coulmier, the director of 
Charenton, had organized those famous performances in which 
madmen sometimes played the roles of actors, sometimes those 
of watched spectators. “The insane who attended these 
theatricals were the object of the attention and curiosity of a 
frivolous, irresponsible, and often vicious public. The bizarre 
attitudes of these unfortunates and their condition provoked the 
mocking laughter and the insulting pity of the spectators.”7 
Madness became pure spectacle, in a world over which Sade 
extended his sovereignty and which was offered as a diversion to 
the good conscience of a reason sure of itself. Until the 
beginning of the nineteenth century, and to the indignation of 
Royer-Collard, madmen remained monsters—that is, 
etymologically, beings or things to be shown. 

Confinement hid away unreason, and betrayed the shame it 
aroused; but it explicitly drew attention to madness, pointed to 
it. If, in the case of unreason, the chief intention was to avoid 
scandal, in the case of madness that intention was to organize it. 
A strange contradiction: the classical age enveloped madness in a 
total experience of unreason; it reabsorbed its particular forms, 
which the Middle Ages and the Renaissance had clearly 
individualized into a general apprehension in which madness 
consorted indiscriminately with all the forms of unreason. But at 
the same time it assigned to this same madness a special sign: not 
that of sickness, but that of glorified scandal. Yet there is 
nothing in common between this organized exhibition of 
madness in the eighteenth century and the freedom with which 
it came to light during the Renaissance. In the Renaissance, 


81 


