

particles, sharp as needles, penetrated bodies and hearts as easily 
as if they were passive and friable alkaline particles. The mixture 
boiled immediately, releasing harmful vapors and corrosive 
liquids: “These wards are a dreadful place where all crimes 
together ferment and spread around them, as by fermentation, a 
contagious atmosphere which those who live there breathe and 

which seems to become attached to them.” These burning 
vapors then rise, spread through the air, and finally fall upon the 
neighborhood, impregnating bodies and contaminating souls. 
Thus the idea of a contagion of evil-as-rottenness is articulated 
in images. The palpable agent of this epidemic is air, that air 
which is called “tainted,” the term obscurely suggesting that it is 
not in conformity with the purity of its nature, and that it acts as 
the communicating element of the taint. It is sufficient to 
remember the value, both moral and medical, ascribed at about 
the same period to country air (bodily health, spiritual vigor), to 
realize the whole complex of contrary meanings conveyed by the 
corrupted air of hospitals, prisons, houses of confinement. By 
this atmosphere laden with maleficent vapors, entire cities were 
threatened, whose inhabitants would be slowly impregnated with 
rottenness and taint. 

And these are not only reflections halfway between morality 
and medicine. We must doubtless take into account an entire 
literary development, a whole emotional, perhaps political 
exploitation of vague fears. But in certain cities there were 
movements of panic as real, as easy to date, as the great crises of 
horror that wracked the Middle Ages from time to time. In 1780 
an epidemic spread through Paris: its origin was attributed to the 
infection of the Hopital General; there was even talk of burning 
the buildings of Bicetre. The police lieutenant, faced with the 
frenzy of the population, sent a commission of inquiry which 
included, together with several staff doctors, the Dean of the 
Faculte and the physician of the Hopital General. According to 


215 


their findings, Bicetre was subject to a “putrid fever” which was 
linked to the bad quality of the air. As for the original source of 
the disease, the report denied that it lay in the internees and the 
infection they might spread; it must be attributed quite simply to 
the bad weather that made the disease endemic in the capital; the 
symptoms that were to be observed at the Hopital General were 
“in accordance with the nature of the season and exactly the same 
as the illnesses observed in Paris at the same period.” The 
