

keep them from the slavery of sin, from being eternally damned, 
and to give them means to rejoice in a perfect contentment in 
this world and in the next; they will do all they can to worship, in 
this world, Divine Providence.... Experience convinces us only 
too unhappily that the source of the misrule triumphant today 
among the young lies entirely in the lack of instruction and of 
obedience in spiritual matters, since they much prefer to follow 
their evil inclinations than the holy inspiration of God and the 
charitable advice of their parents.”11 Therefore the pensioners 
must be delivered from a world which, for their weakness, is only 
an invitation to sin, must be recalled to a solitude where they will 
have as companions only their “guardian angels” incarnate in the 
daily presence of their warders: these latter, in fact, “render them 
the same good offices that their guardian angels perform for 
them invisibly: namely, instruct them, console them, and procure 
their salvation.” In the houses of La Charite, the greatest 
attention was paid to this ordering of life and conscience, which 
throughout the eighteenth century would more and more clearly 
appear as the raison d'etre of confinement. In 1765, new 
regulations were established for the Charite of Chateau-Thierry; 
it was made quite clear that “the Prior will visit all the prisoners 
at least once a week, one after the other, and separately, to 
console them, to exhort them to better conduct, and to assure 
himself that they are treated as they should be; the subordinate 
officer will do this every day.” 

All these prisons of moral order might have borne the motto 
which Howard could still read on the one in Mainz: “If wild 
beasts can be broken to the yoke, it must not be despaired of 
correcting the man who has strayed.” For the Catholic Church, 
as in the Protestant countries, confinement represents, in the 
form of an authoritarian model, the myth of social happiness: a 
police whose order will be entirely transparent to the principles 
of religion, and a religion whose requirements will be satisfied, 


73 


without restrictions, by the regulations of the police and the 
constraints with which it can be armed. There is, in these 
institutions, an attempt of a kind to demonstrate that order may 
be adequate to virtue. In this sense, “confinement” conceals both 
a metaphysics of government and a politics of religion; it is 
situated, as an effort of tyrannical synthesis, in the vast space 
separating the garden of God and the cities which men, driven 
from paradise, have built with their own hands. The house of 
confinement in the classical age constitutes the densest symbol of 
that “police” which conceived of itself as the civil equivalent of 
religion for the edification of a perfect city. 

Confinement was an institutional creation peculiar to the 
seventeenth century. It acquired from the first an importance 
that left it no rapport with imprisonment as practiced in the 
Middle Ages. As an economic measure and a social precaution, it 
had the value of inventiveness. But in the history of unreason, it 
marked a decisive event: the moment when madness was 
perceived on the social horizon of poverty, of incapacity for 
work, of inability to integrate with the group; the moment when 
madness began to rank among the problems of the city. The new 
meanings assigned to poverty, the importance given to the 
obligation to work, and all the ethical values that are linked to 
labor, ultimately determined the experience of madness and 
inflected its course. 

A sensibility was born which had drawn a line and laid a 
cornerstone, and which chose—only to banish. The concrete 
space of classical society reserved a neutral region, a blank page 
where the real life of the city was suspended; here, order no 
longer freely confronted disorder, reason no longer tried to make 
its own way among all that might evade or seek to deny it. Here 
reason reigned in the pure state, in a triumph arranged for it in 
advance over a frenzied unreason. Madness was thus torn from 
that imaginary freedom which still allowed it to flourish on the 


74 



Renaissance horizon. Not so long ago, it had floundered about in 
broad daylight: in King Lear , in Don Quixote. But in less than a 
half-century, it had been sequestered and, in the fortress of 
confinement, bound to Reason, to the rules of morality and to 
their monotonous nights. 


75 



Ill 



76 


