notions of psychiatry in the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries, but rather to show the specific faces by which madness 
was recognized in classical thought. Faces still haunted by 
mythical figures, but which have often been essential in the 
organization of our practical knowledge. 


128 



I. Mania and Melancholia 


The notion of melancholia was fixed, in the sixteenth century, 
between a certain definition by symptoms and an explanatory 
principle concealed in the very term that designated it. Among 
the symptoms, we find all the delirious ideas an individual can 
form about himself: “Some think themselves to be beasts, whose 
voice and actions they imitate. Some think that they are vessels 
of glass, and for this reason recoil from passers-by, lest they 
break; others fear death, which they yet cause most often to 
themselves. Still others imagine that they are guilty of some 
crime, so that they tremble with terror when they see another 
coming toward them, thinking he seeks to take them prisoner 

and sentence them to death.” Delirious themes that remain 
isolated and do not compromise reason’s totality. Thomas 
Sydenham would even observe that melancholics “are people 
who, apart from their complaint, are prudent and sensible, and 
who have an extraordinary penetration and sagacity. Thus 
Aristotle rightly observed that melancholics have more 
intelligence than other men.” 

Now this clear and coherent syndrome was designated by a 
word that implied an entire causal system, that of melancholia: “I 
beg you to regard closely the thoughts of melancholies, their 
words, visions, actions, and you will discover how all their senses 
are depraved by a melancholic humor spread through their 
brain.”2 Partial delirium and the action of black bile were 
juxtaposed in the notion of melancholia, unrelated for the 
moment beyond a disjunct confrontation of a group of signs by a 
signifying name. Yet in the eighteenth century a unity would be 
found, or rather an exchange would be made—the nature of that 
cold, black humor having become the major coloration of 
delirium, its positive value in contrast to mania, dementia, and 


129 


frenzy, its essential principle of cohesion. And while Hermann 
Boerhaave still defined melancholia as merely “a long, persistent 
delirium without fever, during which the sufferer is obsessed by 
only one thought,” Dufour, several years later, shifted the weight 
of his definition to “fear and sadness,” which were now supposed 
to explain the partial character of the delirium: “Hence it is that 
melancholies love solitude and shun company; this makes them 
more attached to the object of their delirium or to their 
dominant passion, whatever it may be, while they seem 
indifferent to anything else.” The concept is fixed not by a new 
rigor in observation, nor by a discovery in the realm of causes, 
but by a qualitative transmission proceeding from a cause implied 
in the designation to a significant perception in the effects. 

For a long time—until the beginning of the seventeenth 
century—the discussion of melancholia remained fixed within 
the tradition of the four humors and their essential qualities: 
stable qualities actually inherent in a substance, which alone 
could be considered as their cause. For Jean Fernel, the 
melancholic humor, related to earth and to autumn, is a juice 
“thick in consistency, cold and dry in temperament.” But in the 
first half of the century, a debate began over the origin of 
melancholia: must one necessarily have a melancholic 
temperament to be afflicted with melancholia? Is the 
melancholic humor always cold and dry—is it never warm, or 
humid? Is it the substance which acts, or the qualities which are 
transmitted? The results of this long debate may be summarized 
as follows: 

1. The causality of substances is increasingly replaced by a 
movement of qualities , which, without any vehicular means, are 
immediately transmitted from body to soul, from humor to ideas, 
from organs to conduct. Thus, for Duncan’s Apologist the best 
proof that the melancholic juice produces melancholia is that in 
it one finds the very qualities of the disease: “The melancholic 
juice possesses to a far greater degree the conditions necessary to 


130 



produce melancholia than your fiery angers; since by its coldness, 
it diminishes the quantity of spirits; by its dryness, it renders 
them capable of preserving for a long time the type of a strong 
and persistent imagination; and by its blackness, it deprives them 
of their natural clarity and subtlety.”3 

2. There is, besides this mechanics of qualities, a dynamics 
