
16 



those of Voley were assigned to the Hopital de Sainte-Foy. Only 
Saint-Mesmin and the wards of Ganets, near Bordeaux, 
remained as a reminder. 

England and Scotland alone had opened 220 lazar houses for a 
million and a half inhabitants in the twelfth century. But as early 
as the fourteenth century they began to empty out; by the time 
Edward III ordered an inquiry into the hospital of Ripon—in 
1342—there were no more lepers; he assigned the institution’s 
effects to the poor. At the end of the twelfth century, 
Archbishop Puisel had founded a hospital in which by 1434 only 
two beds were reserved for lepers, should any be found. In 1348, 
the great leprosarium of Saint Albans contained only three 
patients; the hospital of Romenal in Kent was abandoned 
twenty-four years later, for lack of lepers. At Chatham, the lazar 
house of Saint Bartholomew, established in 1078, had been one 
of the most important in England; under Elizabeth, it cared for 
only two patients; it was finally closed in 1627. 

The same regression of leprosy occurred in Germany, perhaps 
a little more slowly; and the same conversion of the lazar houses, 
hastened by the Reformation, which left municipal 
administrations in charge of welfare and hospital establishments; 
this was the case in Leipzig, in Munich, in Hamburg. In 1542, 
the effects of the lazar houses of Schleswig-Holstein were 
transferred to the hospitals. In Stuttgart a magistrate’s report of 
1589 indicates that for fifty years already there had been no 
lepers in the house provided for them. At Lipplingen, the lazar 
house was soon peopled with incurables and madmen. 

A strange disappearance, which was doubtless not the long- 
sought effect of obscure medical practices, but the spontaneous 
result of segregation and also the consequence, after the 
Crusades, of the break with the Eastern sources of infection. 
Leprosy withdrew, leaving derelict these low places and these 
rites which were intended, not to suppress it, but to keep it at a 
sacred distance, to fix it in an inverse exaltation. What doubtless 


17 



remained longer than leprosy, and would persist when the lazar 
houses had been empty for years, were the values and images 
