according to a visible logic. All that madness can say of itself is 
merely reason, though it is itself the negation of reason. In short, 
a rational hold over madness is always possible and necessary , to the 
very degree that madness is non-reason. 

There is only one word which summarizes this experience, 
Unreason', all that, for reason, is closest and most remote, 
emptiest and most complete; all that presents itself to reason in 
familiar structures—authorizing a knowledge, and then a science, 
which seeks to be positive—and all that is constantly in retreat 
from reason, in the inaccessible domain of nothingness. 

And if, now, we try to assign a value, in and of itself, outside 
its relations with the dream and with error, to classical unreason, 
we must understand it not as reason diseased, or as reason lost or 
alienated, but quite simply as reason dazzled. 

Dazzlement is night in broad daylight, the darkness that rules 


117 



at the very heart of what is excessive in light’s radiance. Dazzled 
reason opens its eyes upon the sun and sees nothing, that is, does 
not see\ in dazzlement, the recession of objects toward the depths 
of night has as an immediate correlative the suppression of vision 
itself; at the moment when it sees objects disappear into the 
secret night of light, sight sees itself in the moment of its 
disappearance. 

To say that madness is dazzlement is to say that the madman 
sees the daylight, the same daylight as the man of reason (both 
live in the same brightness); but seeing this same daylight, and 
nothing but this daylight and nothing in it, he sees it as void, as 
night, as nothing; for him the shadows are the way to perceive 
daylight. Which means that, seeing the night and the 
nothingness of the night, he does not see at all. And believing he 
sees, he admits as realities the hallucinations of his imagination 
and all the multitudinous population of night. That is why 
delirium and dazzlement are in a relation which constitutes the 
essence of madness, exactly as truth and light, in their 
fundamental relation, constitute classical reason. 

In this sense, the Cartesian formula of doubt is certainly the 
great exorcism of madness. Descartes closes his eyes and plugs up 
his ears the better to see the true brightness of essential daylight; 
thus he is secured against the dazzlement of the madman who, 
opening his eyes, sees only night, and not seeing at all, believes 
he sees when he imagines. In the uniform lucidity of his closed 
senses, Descartes has broken with all possible fascination, and if 
he sees, he is certain of seeing that which he sees. While before 
the eyes of the madman, drunk on a light which is darkness, rise 
and multiply images incapable of criticizing themselves (since the 
madman sees them), but irreparably separated from being (since 
the madman sees nothing). 

Unreason is in the same relation to reason as dazzlement to 
the brightness of daylight itself. And this is not a metaphor. We 
are at the center of the great cosmology which animates all 


118 



classical culture. The “cosmos” of the Renaissance, so rich in 
internal communications and symbolisms, entirely dominated by 
the interacting presence of the stars, has now disappeared, 
without “nature” having yet assumed its status of universality, 
without its having received man’s lyrical recognition, subjecting 
him to the rhythm of its seasons. What the classical thinkers 
retain of the “world,” what they already anticipate in “nature,” is 
an extremely abstract law, which nonetheless forms the most 
vivid and concrete opposition, that of day and night. This is no 
longer the fatal time of the planets, it is not yet the lyrical time of 
the seasons; it is the universal but absolutely divided time of 
brightness and darkness. A form which thought entirely masters 
in a mathematical science—Cartesian physics is a kind of 
mathesis of light—but which at the same time traces the great 
tragic caesura in human existence: one that dominates the 
theatrical time of Racine and the space of Georges de la Tour in 
the same imperious fashion. The circle of day and night is the 
law of the classical world: the most reduced but the most 
demanding of the world’s necessities, the most inevitable but the 
simplest of nature’s legalities. 

A law which excludes all dialectic and all reconciliation; which 
establishes, consequently, both the flawless unity of knowledge 
and the uncompromising division of tragic existence; it rules over 
a world without twilight, which knows no effusion, nor the 
attenuated cares of lyricism; everything must be either waking or 
dream, truth or darkness, the light of being or the nothingness of 
shadow. Such a law prescribes an inevitable order, a serene 
division which makes truth possible and confirms it forever. 

And yet on either side of this order, two symmetrical, inverse 
figures bear witness that there are extremities where it can be 
transgressed, showing at the same time to what degree it is 
