unreason and the time of madness receive two opposing vectors: 
one being unconditioned return and absolute submersion; the 
other, on the contrary, developing according to the chronicle of a 
history. 9 

1. Madness and Liberty. For a long time, certain forms of 
melancholia were considered specifically English; this was a fact 
in medicine and a constant in literature. Montesquieu contrasted 
Roman suicide, which was a form of moral and political 


223 




behavior, the desired effect of a concerted education, with 
English suicide, which had to be considered as an illness since 
“the English kill themselves without any apparent reason for 
doing so; they kill themselves in the very lap of happiness.” It is 
here that the milieu plays its role, for if happiness in the 
eighteenth century is part of the order of nature and reason, 
unhappiness, or at least whatever deters from happiness without 
reason, must be part of another order. This order was sought first 
in the excesses of the climate, in nature’s deviation from its 
equilibrium and its happy mean (temperate climates are caused 
by nature; intemperate climates by the milieu). But this was not 
sufficient to explain la maladie anglaise ; already Cheyne had 
declared that wealth, refined food, the abundance all the 
inhabitants enjoyed, the life of pleasure and ease the richest 
society led, were at the origin of such nervous disorders. 
Increasingly, a political and economic explanation was sought, in 
which wealth, progress, institutions appear as the determining 
element of madness. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, 
Spurzheim made a synthesis of all these analyses in one of the 
last texts devoted to them. 10 Madness, “more frequent in 
England than anywhere else,” is merely the penalty of the liberty 
that reigns there, and of the wealth universally enjoyed. Freedom 
of conscience entails more dangers than authority and despotism. 
“Religious sentiments ... exist without restriction; every 
individual is entitled to preach to anyone who will listen to him,” 
and by listening to such different opinions, “minds are disturbed 
in the search for truth.” Dangers of indecision, of an irresolute 
attention, of a vacillating soul! The danger, too, of disputes, of 
passions, of obstinacy: “Everything meets with opposition, and 
opposition excites the feelings; in religion, in politics, in science, 
as in everything, each man is permitted to form an opinion; but 
he must expect to meet with opposition.” Nor does so much 
liberty permit a man to master time; every man is left to his own 


224 


uncertainty, and the State abandons all to their fluctuations: 
“The English are a nation of merchants; a mind always occupied 
with speculations is continually agitated by fear and hope. 
Egotism, the soul of commerce, easily becomes envious and 
summons other faculties to its aid.” Besides, this liberty is far 
from true natural liberty: on all sides it is constrained and harried 
by demands opposed to the most legitimate desires of 
individuals: this is the liberty of interests, of coalitions, of 
financial combinations, not of man, not of minds and hearts. For 
financial reasons, families are here more tyrannical than 
anywhere else: only wealthy girls are able to marry; “the others 
are reduced to other means of satisfaction that ruin the body and 
derange the manifestations of the soul. The same cause favors 
libertinage, which predisposes to madness.” A mercantile liberty 
thus appears as the element in which opinion can never arrive at 
the truth, in which the immediate is necessarily subject to 
contradiction, in which time escapes the mastery and certainty of 
the seasons, in which man is dispossessed of his desires by the 
laws of interest. In short, liberty, far from putting man in 
possession of himself, ceaselessly alienates him from his essence 
and his world; it fascinates him in the absolute exteriority of 
other people and of money, in the irreversible interiority of 
passion and unfulfilled desire. Between man and the happiness 
of a world in which he recognizes himself, between man and a 
nature in which he finds his truth, the liberty of the mercantile 
state is “milieu”: and to this very degree it is the determining 
element of madness. When Spurzheim was writing—at the 
height of the Holy Alliance, during the restoration of the 
authoritarian monarchies—liberalism was readily blamed for all 
the sins of the world’s madness: “It is singular to see that man s 
greatest desire, which is his personal liberty, has its disadvantages 
as well.” But for us, the point of such an analysis is not its 
critique of liberty, but its very employment of the notion that 
designates for Spurzheim the non-natural milieu in which the 


225 



psychological and physiological mechanisms of madness are 
favored, amplified, and multiplied. 

2. Madness , Religion , and Time. Religious beliefs prepare a 
kind of landscape of images, an illusory milieu favorable to every 
hallucination and every delirium. For a long time, doctors were 
