
of the novel and the theater. Let us not be surprised to find it 
actually prowling through the streets. Thousands of times, 
Francois Colletet has met it there: 

I see, in this thoroughfare, 

A natural, followed by children 
... Consider this unhappy wretch; 

Poor mad fool, what will he do 
With so many rags and tatters?... 

I have seen such wild lunatics 
Shouting insults in the streets ... 

Madness traces a very familiar silhouette in the social 
landscape. A new and lively pleasure is taken in the old 
confraternities of madmen, in their festivals, their gatherings, 
their speeches. Men argue passionately for or against Nicolas 
Joubert, better known by the name of Angoulevent, who declares 
himself Prince of Fools, a title disputed by Valenti le Comte and 
Jacques Resneau: there follow pamphlets, a trial, arguments; his 
lawyer declares and certifies him to be “an empty head, a gutted 
gourd, lacking in common sense; a cane, a broken brain, that has 
neither spring nor whole wheel in his head.” Bluet d’ Arberes, 
who calls himself Comte de Permission, is a protege of the 
Crequis, the Lesdiguieres, the Bouillons, the Nemours; in 1602 
he publishes—or someone publishes for him—his works, in 
which he warns the reader that “he does not know how to read 
or write, and has never learned,” but that he is animated “by the 
inspiration of God and the Angels.” Pierre Dupuis, whom 
Regnier mentions in his sixth satire, is, according to 
Brascambille, “an archfool in a long robe”; he himself in his 
“Remontrance sur le reveil de Maitre Guillaume” states that he 
has “a mind elevated as far as the antechamber of the third 
degree of the moon.” And many other characters present in 
Regnier s fourteenth satire. 


47 



This world of the early seventeenth century is strangely 
hospitable, in all senses, to madness. Madness is here, at the 
heart of things and of men, an ironic sign that misplaces the 
guideposts between the real and the chimerical, barely retaining 
the memory of the great tragic threats—a life more disturbed 
than disturbing, an absurd agitation in society, the mobility of 
reason. 

But new requirements are being generated: 

A hundred and a hundred times have I taken up my lantern, 

Seeking, at high noon .. .H 


48 


II 



49 



THE GREAT 
CONFINEMENT 


Compelle intrare. 

BY a strange act of force, the classical age was to reduce to 
silence the madness whose voices the Renaissance had just 
liberated, but whose violence it had already tamed. 

It is common knowledge that the seventeenth century created 
enormous houses of confinement; it is less commonly known 
that more than one out of every hundred inhabitants of the city 
of Paris found themselves confined there, within several months. 
It is common knowledge that absolute power made use of lettres 
de cachet and arbitrary measures of imprisonment; what is less 
familiar is the judicial conscience that could inspire such 
practices. Since Pinel, Tuke, Wagnitz, we know that madmen 
were subjected to the regime of this confinement for a century 
and a half, and that they would one day be discovered in the 
wards of the Hopital General, in the cells of prisons; they would 
be found mingled with the population of the workhouses or 
Zuchthausern. But it has rarely been made clear what their status 
was there, what the meaning was of this proximity which seemed 
to assign the same homeland to the poor, to the unemployed, to 
prisoners, and to the insane. It is within the walls of confinement 
that Pinel and nineteenth-century psychiatry would come upon 
madmen; it is there—let us remember—that they would leave 
them, not without boasting of having “delivered” them. From 
the middle of the seventeenth century, madness was linked with 
