Let us return to the first moments of the “Confinement,” and 
to that royal edict of April 27, 1656, that led to the creation of 
the Hopital General. From the beginning, the institution set 
itself the task of preventing “mendicancy and idleness as the 
source of all disorders.” In fact, this was the last of the great 
measures that had been taken since the Renaissance to put an 
end to unemployment or at least to begging.4 In 1532, the 
Parlement of Paris decided to arrest beggars and force them to 
work in the sewers of the city, chained in pairs. The situation 
soon reached critical proportions: on March 23, 1534, the order 
was given “to poor scholars and indigents” to leave the city, while 
it was forbidden “henceforth to sing hymns before images in the 
streets.” The wars of religion multiplied this suspect crowd, 
which included peasants driven from their farms, disbanded 
soldiers or deserters, unemployed workers, impoverished 
students, and the sick. When Henri IV began the siege of Paris, 
the city, which had less than 100,000 inhabitants, contained 
more than 30,000 beggars. An economic revival began early in 
the seventeenth century; it was decided to reabsorb by force the 
unemployed who had not regained a place in society; a decree of 
the Parlement dated 1606 ordered the beggars of Paris to be 
whipped in the public square, branded on the shoulder, shorn, 
and then driven from the city; to keep them from returning, an 
ordinance of 1607 established companies of archers at all the city 
gates to forbid entry to indigents. When the effects of the 
economic renaissance disappeared with the Thirty Years’ War, 
the problems of mendicancy and idleness reappeared; until the 


58 


middle of the century, the regular increase of taxes hindered 
manufactures and augmented unemployment. This was the 
period of uprisings in Paris (1621), in Lyons (1652), in Rouen 
(1639). At the same time, the world of labor was disorganized by 
the appearance of new economic structures; as the large 
manufactories developed, the guilds lost their powers and their 
rights, the “General Regulations” prohibited all assemblies of 
workers, all leagues, all “associations.” In many-professions, 
however, the guilds were reconstituted. They were prosecuted, 
but it seems that the Parlements showed a certain apathy; the 
Parlement of Normandy disclaimed all competence to judge the 
rioters of Rouen. This is doubtless why the Church intervened 
and accused the workers’ secret gatherings of sorcery. A decree of 
the Sorbonne, in 1655, proclaimed “guilty of sacrilege and mortal 
sin” all those who were found in such bad company. 

In this silent conflict that opposed the severity of the Church 
to the indulgence of the Parlements, the creation of the Hopital 
was certainly, at least in the beginning, a victory for the 
Parlement. It was, in any case, a new solution. For the first time, 
purely negative measures of exclusion were replaced by a measure 
of confinement; the unemployed person was no longer driven 
away or punished; he was taken in charge, at the expense of the 
nation but at the cost of his individual liberty. Between him and 
society, an implicit system of obligation was established: he had 
the right to be fed, but he must accept the physical and moral 
constraint of confinement. 

It is this entire, rather undifferentiated mass at which the edict 
of 1657 is aimed: a population without resources, without social 
moorings, a class rejected or rendered mobile by new economic 
developments. Less than two weeks after it was signed, the edict 
was read and proclaimed in the streets. Paragraph 9: “We 
expressly prohibit and forbid all persons of either sex, of any 
locality and of any age, of whatever breeding and birth, and in 
whatever condition they may be, able-bodied or invalid, sick or 


59 



convalescent, curable or incurable, to beg in the city and suburbs 
of Paris, neither in the churches, nor at the doors of such, nor at 
the doors of houses nor in the streets, nor anywhere else in 
public, nor in secret, by day or night ... under pain of being 
whipped for the first offense, and for the second condemned to 
the galleys if men and boys, banished if women and girls.” The 
year after—Sunday, May 13, 1657—a high mass in honor of the 
Holy Ghost was sung at the Church of Saint-Louis de la Pitie, 
and on the morning of Monday the fourteenth, the militia, 
which was to become, in the mythology of popular terror, “the 
archers of the Hopital,” began to hunt down beggars and herd 
them into the different buildings of the Hopital. Four years later, 
La Salpetriere housed 1,460 women and small children; at La 
Pitie there were 98 boys, 897 girls between seven and seventeen, 
and 95 women; at Bicetre, 1,615 adult men; at La Savonnerie, 
305 boys between eight and thirteen; finally, Scipion lodged 530 
pregnant women, nursing women, and very young children. 
Initially, married people, even in need, were not admitted; the 
administration was instructed to feed them at home; but soon, 
thanks to a grant from Mazarin, it was possible to lodge them at 
La Salpetriere. In all, between five and six thousand persons. 

Throughout Europe, confinement had the same meaning, at 
least if we consider its origin. It constituted one of the answers 
the seventeenth century gave to an economic crisis that affected 
the entire Western world: reduction of wages, unemployment, 
