text, exclusively on the level of virtue, labor, and social life. 

The asylum is a religious domain without religion, a domain 
of pure morality, of ethical uniformity. Everything that might 
retain the signs of the old differences was eliminated. The last 
vestiges of rite were extinguished. Formerly the house of 
confinement had inherited, in the social sphere, the almost 
absolute limits of the lazar house; it was a foreign country. Now 
the asylum must represent the great continuity of social morality. 
The values of family and work, all the acknowledged virtues, 
now reign in the asylum. But their reign is a double one. First, 
they prevail in fact, at the heart of madness itself; beneath the 
violence and disorder of insanity, the solid nature of the essential 
virtues is not disrupted. There is a primitive morality which is 
ordinarily not affected even by the worst dementia; it is this 


268 



morality which both appears and functions in the cure: “I can 
generally testify to the pure virtues and severe principles often 
manifested by the cure. Nowhere except in novels have I seen 
spouses more worthy of being cherished, parents more tender, 
lovers more passionate, or persons more attached to their duties 
than the majority of the insane fortunately brought to the period 
of convalescence.”10 This inalienable virtue is both the truth and 
the resolution of madness. Which is why, if it reigns, it must 
reign as well. The asylum reduces differences, represses vice, 
eliminates irregularities. It denounces everything that opposes 
the essential virtues of society: celibacy—“the number of girls 
fallen into idiocy is seven times greater than the number of 
married women for the Year XI and the Year XIII; for dementia, 
the proportion is two to four times greater; we can thus deduce 
that marriage constitutes for women a kind of preservative 
against the two sorts of insanity which are most inveterate and 
most often incurable”; debauchery, misconduct, and “extreme 
perversity of habits”—“vicious habits such as drunkenness, 
limitless promiscuity, an apathetic lack of concern can gradually 
degrade the reason and end in outright insanity”; laziness—“it is 
the most constant and unanimous result of experience that in all 
public asylums, as in prisons and hospitals, the surest and 
perhaps the sole guarantee of the maintenance of health and 
good habits and order is the law of rigorously executed 
mechanical work.” The asylum sets itself the task of the 
homogeneous rule of morality, its rigorous extension to all those 
who tend to escape from it. 

But it thereby generates an indifference; if the law does not 
reign universally, it is because there are men who do not 
recognize it, a class of society that lives in disorder, in negligence, 
and almost in illegality: “If on the one hand we see families 
prosper for a long series of years in the bosom of harmony and 
order and concord, how many others, especially in the lower 


269 


classes, afflict the eye with a repulsive spectacle of debauchery, of 
dissensions, and shameful distress! That, according to my daily 
notes, is the most fertile source of the insanity we treat in the 

hospitals.’T1 

In one and the same movement, the asylum becomes, in 
Pinel’s hands, an instrument of moral uniformity and of social 
denunciation. The problem is to impose, in a universal form, a 
morality that will prevail from within upon those who are 
strangers to it and in whom insanity is already present before it 
has made itself manifest. In the first case, the asylum must act as 
an awakening and a reminder, invoking a forgotten nature; in the 
second, it must act by means of a social shift in order to snatch 
the individual from his condition. The operation as practiced at 
the Retreat was still simple: religious segregation for purposes of 
moral purification. The operation as practiced by Pinel was 
relatively complex: to effect moral syntheses, assuring an ethical 
continuity between the world of madness and the world of 
reason, but by practicing a social segregation that would 
guarantee bourgeois morality a universality of fact and permit it 
to be imposed as a law upon all forms of insanity. 

In the classical period, indigence, laziness, vice, and madness 
mingled in an equal guilt within unreason; madmen were caught 
in the great confinement of poverty and unemployment, but all 
had been promoted, in the proximity of transgression, to the 
essence of a Fall. Now madness belonged to social failure, which 
appeared without distinction as its cause, model, and limit. Half 
a century later, mental disease would become degeneracy. 
Henceforth, the essential madness, and the really dangerous one, 
was that which rose from the lower depths of society. 

Pinefs asylum would never be, as a retreat from the world, a 
space of nature and immediate truth like Tuke’s, but a uniform 
domain of legislation, a site of moral syntheses where insanities 
born on the outer limits of society were eliminated. The entire 


270 
