reign universally, it is because there are men who do not 
recognize it, a class of society that lives in disorder, in negligence, 
and almost in illegality: “If on the one hand we see families 
prosper for a long series of years in the bosom of harmony and 
order and concord, how many others, especially in the lower 


269 


classes, afflict the eye with a repulsive spectacle of debauchery, of 
dissensions, and shameful distress! That, according to my daily 
notes, is the most fertile source of the insanity we treat in the 

hospitals.’T1 

In one and the same movement, the asylum becomes, in 
Pinel’s hands, an instrument of moral uniformity and of social 
denunciation. The problem is to impose, in a universal form, a 
morality that will prevail from within upon those who are 
strangers to it and in whom insanity is already present before it 
has made itself manifest. In the first case, the asylum must act as 
an awakening and a reminder, invoking a forgotten nature; in the 
second, it must act by means of a social shift in order to snatch 
the individual from his condition. The operation as practiced at 
the Retreat was still simple: religious segregation for purposes of 
moral purification. The operation as practiced by Pinel was 
relatively complex: to effect moral syntheses, assuring an ethical 
continuity between the world of madness and the world of 
reason, but by practicing a social segregation that would 
guarantee bourgeois morality a universality of fact and permit it 
to be imposed as a law upon all forms of insanity. 

In the classical period, indigence, laziness, vice, and madness 
mingled in an equal guilt within unreason; madmen were caught 
in the great confinement of poverty and unemployment, but all 
had been promoted, in the proximity of transgression, to the 
essence of a Fall. Now madness belonged to social failure, which 
appeared without distinction as its cause, model, and limit. Half 
a century later, mental disease would become degeneracy. 
Henceforth, the essential madness, and the really dangerous one, 
was that which rose from the lower depths of society. 

Pinefs asylum would never be, as a retreat from the world, a 
space of nature and immediate truth like Tuke’s, but a uniform 
domain of legislation, a site of moral syntheses where insanities 
born on the outer limits of society were eliminated. The entire 


270 
