Tuke had set up within confinement. He did deliver the patient 
from the existence of the asylum within which his “liberators” 
had alienated him; but he did not deliver him from what was 
essential in this existence; he regrouped its powers, extended 
them to the maximum by uniting them in the doctor s hands; he 
created the psychoanalytical situation where, by an inspired 
short-circuit, alienation becomes disalienating because, in the 
doctor, it becomes a subject. 

The doctor, as an alienating figure, remains the key to 
psychoanalysis. It is perhaps because it did not suppress this 
ultimate structure, and because it referred all the others to it, that 
psychoanalysis has not been able, will not be able, to hear the 
voices of unreason, nor to decipher in themselves the signs of the 
madman. Psychoanalysis can unravel some of the forms of 
madness; it remains a stranger to the sovereign enterprise of 
unreason. It can neither liberate nor transcribe, nor most 
certainly explain, what is essential in this enterprise. 

Since the end of the eighteenth century, the life of unreason 
no longer manifests itself except in the lightning-flash of works 
such as those of Holderlin, of Nerval, of Nietzsche, or of Artaud 
—forever irreducible to those alienations that can be cured, 


288 



resisting by their own strength that gigantic moral imprisonment 
which we are in the habit of calling, doubtless by antiphrasis, the 
liberation of the insane by Pinel and Tuke. 


289 




290 


CONCLUSION 


THE Goya who painted The Madhouse must have experienced 
before that grovel of flesh in the void, that nakedness among 
bare walls, something related to a contemporary pathos: the 
symbolic tinsel that crowned the insane kings left in full view 
suppliant bodies, bodies vulnerable to chains and whips, which 
contradicted the delirium of the faces, less by the poverty of these 
trappings than by the human truth which radiated from all that 
unprofaned flesh. The man in the tricorne is not mad because he 
has stuck an old hat upon his nakedness; but within this 
madman in a hat rises—by the inarticulate power of his muscular 
body, of his savage and marvelously unconstricted youth—a 
human presence already liberated and somehow free since the 
beginning of time, by his birthright. The Madhouse is less 
concerned with madness and those strange faces one finds 
elsewhere in the Caprichos , moreover, than with the vast 
monotony of these new bodies, shown in all their vigor, and 
whose gestures, if they invoke their dreams, celebrate especially 
their dark freedom: its language is close to the world of Pinel. 

The Goya of the Disparates and the Quinta del Sordo 
addresses himself to another madness. Not that of madmen cast 
into prison, but that of man cast into darkness. Does Goya not 
link us, by memory, with the old world of enchantments, of 
fantastic rides, of witches perched on the branches of dead trees? 
Is not the monster whispering its secrets into the ears of the 
Monk related to the gnome who fascinated Bosch’s Saint 
Anthony? But they are different for Goya, and their prestige, 
which overshadows all his later work, derives from another 
power. For Bosch or Brueghel, these forms are generated by the 
world itself; through the fissures of a strange poetry, they rise 
from stones and plants, they well out of an animal howl; the 


291 



whole complicity of nature is not too much for their dance. 
Goya s forms are born out of nothing: they have no background, 
in the double sense that they are silhouetted against only the 
most monotonous darkness, and that nothing can assign them 
their origin, their limit, and their nature. The Disparates are 
without landscape, without walls, without setting—and this is 
still a further difference from the Caprichos', there is not a star in 
the night sky of the great human bats we see in the Way oj 
Flying. The branch on which these witches jabber—out of what 
tree does it grow? Does it fly? Toward what sabbath, and what 
clearing? Nothing in all this deals with a world, neither this one 
nor any other. It is indeed a question of that Sleep of Reason 
which Goya, in 1797, had already made the first image of the 
“universal idiom”; it is a question of a night which is doubtless 
that of classical unreason, that triple night into which Orestes 
sank. But in that night, man communicates with what is deepest 
in himself, and with what is most solitary. The desert of Bosch’s 
Saint Anthony was infinitely populous; and even if it was a 
