famous: the decision to remove the chains from the prisoners in 
the dungeons; Couthon visiting the hospital to find out whether 
any suspects were being hidden; Pinel courageously going to 
meet him, while everyone trembled at the sight of the “invalid 
carried in men’s arms.” The confrontation of the wise, firm 
philanthropist and the paralytic monster. “Pinel immediately led 
him to the section for the deranged, where the sight of the cells 
made a painful impression on him. He asked to interrogate all 


253 


the patients. From most, he received only insults and obscene 
apostrophes. It was useless to prolong the interview. Turning to 
Pinel: ‘Now, citizen, are you mad yourself to seek to unchain 
such beasts?’ Pinel replied calmly: ‘Citizen, I am convinced that 
these madmen are so intractable only because they have been 
deprived of air and liberty.’ 

“ ‘Well, do as you like with them, but I fear you may become 
the victim of your own presumption.’ Whereupon, Couthon was 
taken to his carriage. His departure was a relief; everyone 
breathed again; the great philanthropist immediately set to 
work. ”2 

These are images, at least insofar as each of the stories derives 
the essence of its power from imaginary forms: the patriarchal 
calm of Tuke’s home, where the heart’s passions and the mind’s 
disorders slowly subside; the lucid firmness of Pinel, who masters 
in a word and a gesture the two animal frenzies that roar against 
him as they hunt him down; and the wisdom that could 
distinguish, between the raving madman and the bloodthirsty 
member of the Convention, which was the true danger: images 
that will carry far—to our own day—their weight of legend. 

The legends of Pinel and Tuke transmit mythical values, 
which nineteenth-century psychiatry would accept as obvious in 
nature. But beneath the myths themselves, there was an 
operation, or rather a series of operations, which silently 
organized the world of the asylum, the methods of cure, and at 
the same time the concrete experience of madness. 

Tuke’s gesture, first of all. Because it is contemporary with 
Pinel’s, because he is known to have been borne along by a whole 
current of “philanthropy,” this gesture is regarded as an act of 
“liberation.” The truth was quite different: “... there has also 
been particular occasion to observe the great loss, which 
individuals of our society have sustained, by being put under the 
care of those who are not only strangers to our principles, but by 


254 


whom they are frequently mixed with other patients, who may 
indulge themselves in ill language, and other exceptionable 
practices. This often seems to leave an unprofitable effect upon 
the patients’ minds after they are restored to the use of their 
reason, alienating them from those religious attachments which 
they had before experienced; and sometimes, even corrupting 
them with vicious habits to which they had been strangers. ”5 
The Retreat would serve as an instrument of segregation: a moral 
and religious segregation which sought to reconstruct around 
madness a milieu as much as possible like that of the 
Community of Quakers. And this for two reasons: first, the sight 
of evil is for every sensitive soul the cause of suffering, the origin 
of all those strong and untoward passions such as horror, hate, 
and digust which engender or perpetuate madness: “It was 
thought, very justly, that the indiscriminate mixture, which must 
occur in large public establishments, of persons of opposite 
religious sentiments and practices; of the profligate and the 
virtuous; the profane and the serious; was calculated to check the 
progress of returning reason, and to fix, still deeper, the 
melancholy and misanthropic train of ideas ...”4 But the 
principal reason lies elsewhere: it is that religion can play the 
double role of nature and of rule, since it has assumed the depth 
of nature in ancestral habit, in education, in everyday exercise, 
and since it is at the same time a constant principle of coercion. 
It is both spontaneity and constraint, and to this degree it 
controls the only forces that can, in reason’s eclipse, 
counterbalance the measureless violence of madness; its precepts, 
“where these have been strongly imbued in early life ... become 
little less than principles of our nature; and their restraining 
power is frequently felt, even under the delirious excitement of 
insanity. To encourage the influence of religious principles over 
the mind of the insane is considered of great consequence, as a 
means of cure. ”5 In the dialectic of insanity where reason hides 


255 


without abolishing itself, religion constitutes the concrete form 
of what cannot go mad; it bears what is invincible in reason, it 
bears what subsists beneath madness as quasi-nature and around 
it as the constant solicitation of a milieu “where, during lucid 
intervals, or the state of convalescence, the patient might enjoy 
the society of those who were of similar habits and opinions.” 
Religion safeguards the old secret of reason in the presence of 
