countless Temptations. What assails the hermit’s tranquillity is 
not objects of desire, but these hermetic, demented forms which 
have risen from a dream, and remain silent and furtive on the 
surface of a world. In the Lisbon Temptation , facing Saint 
Anthony sits one of these figures born of madness, of its 
solitude, of its penitence, of its privations; a wan smile lights this 
bodiless face, the pure presence of anxiety in the form of an agile 
grimace. Now it is exactly this nightmare silhouette that is at 
once the subject and object of the temptation; it is this figure 
which fascinates the gaze of the ascetic—both are prisoners of a 
kind of mirror interrogation, which remains unanswered in a 
silence inhabited only by the monstrous swarm that surrounds 
them. The gryllos no longer recalls man, by its satiric form, to 
his spiritual vocation forgotten in the folly of desire. It is 
madness become Temptation; all it embodies of the impossible, 
the fantastic, the inhuman, all that suggests the unnatural, the 
writhing of an insane presence on the earth’s surface-all this is 
precisely what gives the gryllos its strange power. The freedom, 
however frightening, of his dreams, the hallucinations of his 
madness, have more power of attraction for fifteenth-century 
man than the desirable reality of the flesh. 


31 



What then is this fascination which now operates through the 
images of madness? 

First, man finds in these fantastic figures one of the secrets 
and one of the vocations of his nature. In the thought of the 
Middle Ages, the legions of animals, named once and for all by 
Adam, symbolically bear the values of humanity. But at the 
beginning of the Renaissance, the relations with animality are 
reversed; the beast is set free; it escapes the world of legend and 
moral illustration to acquire a fantastic nature of its own. And by 
an astonishing reversal, it is now the animal that will stalk man, 
capture him, and reveal him to his own truth. Impossible 
animals, issuing from a demented imagination, become the 
secret nature of man; and when on the Last Day sinful man 
appears in his hideous nakedness, we see that he has the 
monstrous shape of a delirious animal; these are the screech owls 
whose toad bodies combine, in Thierry Bouts’s Hell , with the 
nakedness of the damned; these are Stephan Lochner’s winged 
insects with cats’ heads, sphinxes with beetles’ wing cases, birds 
whose wings are as disturbing and as avid as hands; this is the 
great beast of prey with knotty fingers that figures in Matthias 
Griinewald’s Temptation. Animality has escaped domestication 
by human symbols and values; and it is animality that reveals the 
