

life of the inmates, the entire conduct of their keepers and 
doctors, were organized by Pinel so that these moral syntheses 
would function. And this by three principal means: 

1. Silence. The fifth chained prisoner released by Pinel was a 
former ecclesiastic whose madness had caused him to be 
excommunicated; suffering from delusions of grandeur, he 
believed he was Christ; this was “the height of human arrogance 
in delirium.” Sent to Bicetre in 1782, he had been in chains for 
twelve years. For the pride of his bearing, the grandiloquence of 
his ideas, he was one of the most celebrated spectacles of the 
entire hospital, but as he knew that he was reliving Christ’s 
Passion, “he endured with patience this long martyrdom and the 
continual sarcasms his mania exposed him to.” Pinel chose him 
as one of the first twelve to be released, though his delirium was 
still acute. But Pinel did not treat him as he did the others; 
without a word, he had his chains struck off, and “ordered 
expressly that everyone imitate his own reserve and not address a 
word to this poor madman. This prohibition, which was 
rigorously observed, produced upon this self-intoxicated creature 
an effect much more perceptible than irons and the dungeon; he 
felt humiliated in an abandon and an isolation so new to him 
amid his freedom. Finally, after long hesitations, they saw him 
come of his own accord to join the society of the other patients; 
henceforth, he returned to more sensible and true ideas.”12 

Deliverance here has a paradoxical meaning. The dungeon, 
the chains, the continual spectacle, the sarcasms were, to the 
sufferer in his delirium, the very element of his liberty. 
Acknowledged in that very fact and fascinated from without by 
so much complicity, he could not be dislodged from his 
immediate truth. But the chains that fell, the indifference and 
silence of all those around him confined him in the limited use of 
an empty liberty; he was delivered in silence to a truth which was 
not acknowledged and which he would demonstrate in vain, 


271 


since he was no longer a spectacle, and from which he could 
derive no exaltation, since he was not even humiliated. It was the 
man himself, not his projection in a delirium, who was now 
humiliated: for physical constraint yielded to a liberty that 
constantly touched the limits of solitude; the dialogue of 
delirium and insult gave way to a monologue in a language which 
exhausted itself in the silence of others; the entire show of 
presumption and outrage was replaced by indifference. 
Henceforth, more genuinely confined than he could have been in 
a dungeon and chains, a prisoner of nothing but himself, the 
sufferer was caught in a relation to himself that was of the order 
of transgression, and in a non-relation to others that was of the 
order of shame. The others are made innocent, they are no 
longer persecutors; the guilt is shifted inside, showing the 
madman that he was fascinated by nothing but his own 
presumption; the enemy faces disappear; he no longer feels their 
presence as observation, but as a denial of attention, as 
observation deflected; the others are now nothing but a limit that 
ceaselessly recedes as he advances. Delivered from his chains, he 
is now chained, by silence, to transgression and to shame. He 
feels himself punished, and he sees the sign of his innocence in 
that fact; free from all physical punishment, he must prove 
himself guilty. His torment was his glory; his deliverance must 
humiliate him. 

Compared to the incessant dialogue of reason and madness 
during the Renaissance, classical internment had been a 
silencing. But it was not total: language was engaged in things 
rather than really suppressed. Confinement, prisons, dungeons, 
even tortures, engaged in a mute dialogue between reason and 
unreason—the dialogue of struggle. This dialogue itself was now 
disengaged; silence was absolute; there was no longer any 
common language between madness and reason; the language of 
delirium can be answered only by an absence of language, for 
delirium is not a fragment of dialogue with reason, it is not 


272 



language at all; it refers, in an ultimately silent awareness, only to 
transgression. And it is only at this point that a common 
language becomes possible again, insofar as it will be one of 
acknowledged guilt. ‘‘Finally, after long hesitations, they saw him 
come of his own accord to join the society of the other 
patients ...” The absence of language, as a fundamental structure 
of asylum life, has its correlative in the exposure of confession. 
When Freud, in psychoanalysis, cautiously reinstitutes exchange, 
or rather begins once again to listen to this language, henceforth 
eroded into monologue, should we be astonished that the 
formulations he hears are always those of transgression? In this 
inveterate silence, transgression has taken over the very sources 
of speech. 

2. Recognition by Mirror. At the Retreat, the madman was 
observed, and knew he was observed; but except for that direct 
observation which permitted only an indirect apprehension of 
