
2. a physiology of corporeal continuity; 

3. an ethic of nervous sensibility. 

If corporeal space is perceived as a solid and continuous whole, 
the disordered movement of hysteria and of hypochondria could 
result only from an element whose extreme tenuousness and 
incessant mobility permitted it to penetrate into the place 
occupied by the solids themselves. As Nathaniel Highmore put 
it, the animal spirits, “because of their igneous tenuity, can 
penetrate even the densest, the most compact bodies ..., and 
because of their activity, can penetrate the entire microcosm in a 
single instant.” The spirits, if their mobility increased, if 
penetration occurred, chaotically and in an untimely manner, in 
all the parts of the body to which they were unsuited, provoked a 
thousand diverse signs of disturbance. Hysteria, for Highmore as 
for Willis, his adversary, and for Sydenham as well, was the 
disease of a body indiscriminately penetrable to all the efforts of 
the spirits, so that the internal order of organs gave way to the 
incoherent space of masses passively subject to the chaotic 
movement of the spirits. These latter “move impetuously and in 
excessive quantity upon such or such a part, there causing spasms 


157 



or even pain ... and disturbing the function of the organs, both 
those which they abandon and those toward which they move, 
neither being able to avoid serious damage from this unequal 
distribution of spirits, which is entirely contrary to the laws of 
animal economy.” 13 The hysterical body was thus given over to 
that disorder of the spirits which, outside of all organic laws and 
any functional necessity, could successively seize upon all the 
available spaces of the body. 

The effects varied according to the regions affected, and the 
disease, undifferentiated in the pure source of its movement, 
assumed various configurations depending on the spaces it 
traversed and the surfaces where it appeared: “Having 
accumulated in the stomach, they rush in a host and with 
impetuosity upon the muscles of the larynx and the pharynx, 
producing spasms throughout the entire area they traverse, and 
causing in the stomach a swelling which resembles a large ball.” 
A little higher, the hysterical affection, “seizing upon the colon 
and upon the region which is below the heart cavity, causes there 
an insupportable pain which resembles the iliac affection.” 
Should it rise still higher, the disease attacks “the vital parts and 
