the river with its thousand arms, the sea with its thousand roads, 


22 



to that great uncertainty external to everything. He is a prisoner 
in the midst of what is the freest, the openest of routes: bound 
fast at the infinite crossroads. He is the Passenger par excellence'. 
that is, the prisoner of the passage. And the land he will come to 
is unknown—as is, once he disembarks, the land from which he 
comes. He has his truth and his homeland only in that fruitless 
expanse between two countries that cannot belong to him. Is it 
this ritual and these values which are at the origin of the long 
imaginary relationship that can be traced through the whole of 
Western culture? Or is it, conversely, this relationship that, from 
time immemorial, has called into being and established the rite 
of embarkation? One thing at least is certain: water and madness 
have long been linked in the dreams of European man. 

Already, disguised as a madman, Tristan had ordered boatmen 
to land him on the coast of Cornwall. And when he arrived at 
the castle of King Mark, no one recognized him, no one knew 
whence he had come. But he made too many strange remarks, 
both familiar and distant; he knew too well the secrets of the 
commonplace not to have been from another, yet nearby, world. 
He did not come from the solid land, with its solid cities; but 
indeed from the ceaseless unrest of the sea, from those unknown 
highways which conceal so much strange knowledge, from that 
fantastic plain, the underside of the world. Iseut, first of all, 
realized that this madman was a son of the sea, and that insolent 
sailors had cast him here, a sign of misfortune: “Accursed be the 
sailors that brought this madman! Why did they not throw him 

into the sea!” - And more than once in the course of time, the 
same theme reappears: among the mystics of the fifteenth 
century, it has become the motif of the soul as a skiff, abandoned 
on the infinite sea of desires, in the sterile field of cares and 
ignorance, among the mirages of knowledge, amid the unreason 
of the world—a craft at the mercy of the sea s great madness, 
unless it throws out a solid anchor, faith, or raises its spiritual 


23 


sails so that the breath of God may bring it to port. At the end of 
the sixteenth century, De Lancre sees in the sea the origin of the 
demoniacal leanings of an entire people: the hazardous labor of 
ships, dependence on the stars, hereditary secrets, estrangement 
from women—the very image of the great, turbulent plain itself 
makes man lose faith in God and all his attachment to his home; 
he is then in the hands of the Devil, in the sea of Satan’s ruses.3 
In the classical period, the melancholy of the English was easily 
explained by the influence of a maritime climate, cold, humidity, 
the instability of the weather; all those fine droplets of water that 
penetrated the channels and fibers of the human body and made 
it lose its firmness, predisposed it to madness. Finally, neglecting 
an immense literature that stretches from Ophelia to the Lorelei, 
let us note only the great half-anthropological, half-cosmological 
analyses of Heinroth, which interpret madness as the 
manifestation in man of an obscure and aquatic element, a dark 
disorder, a moving chaos, the seed and death of all things, which 
opposes the mind’s luminous and adult stability. 

But if the navigation of madmen is linked in the Western 
mind with so many immemorial motifs, why, so abruptly, in the 
fifteenth century, is the theme suddenly formulated in literature 
and iconography? Why does the figure of the Ship of Fools and 
its insane crew all at once invade the most familiar landscapes? 
Why, from the old union of water and madness, was this ship 
born one day, and on just that day? 

Because it symbolized a great disquiet, suddenly dawning on 
the horizon of European culture at the end of the Middle Ages. 
Madness and the madman become major figures, in their 
ambiguity: menace and mockery, the dizzying unreason of the 
world, and the feeble ridicule of men. 

First a whole literature of tales and moral fables, in origin, 
doubtless, quite remote. But by the end of the Middle Ages, it 
bulks large: a long series of “follies” which, stigmatizing vices and 


24 


faults as in the past, no longer attribute them all to pride, to lack 
of charity, to neglect of Christian virtues, but to a sort of great 
unreason for which nothing, in fact, is exactly responsible, but 
which involves everyone in a kind of secret complicity. The 
denunciation of madness {la folie) becomes the general form of 
criticism. In farces and soties, the character of the Madman, the 
Fool, or the Simpleton assumes more and more importance. He 
is no longer simply a ridiculous and familiar silhouette in the 
wings: he stands center stage as the guardian of truth-playing 
here a role which is the complement and converse of that taken 
by madness in the tales and the satires. If folly leads each man 
into a blindness where he is lost, the madman, on the contrary, 
