full of foreign lunatics would dock at their harbors. The 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries saw much social unrest and 
economic depression, which they tried to solve by imprisoning 
the indigents with the criminals and forcing them to work. The 
demented fitted quite naturally between those two extremes of 
social maladjustment and iniquity. 

A nice and hallowed tradition has labeled Tuke and Pinel as 
the saviors of the mentally ill, but the truth of the matter is not 
so simple. Many others had treated them with kindness, 
pleading that they belonged first and foremost with their 
families, and for at least two hundred years before the 1780s, 
legislation had been considered or passed to segregate criminals 
and indigents from fools. But this legislation was prompted, as 
often as not, by a desire to protect the poor, the criminal, the 
man imprisoned for debts, and the juvenile delinquent from the 
frightening bestiality of the madman. As the madman had 
replaced the leper, the mentally ill person was now a subhuman 
and beastly scapegoat; hence the need to protect others. While 
the Quaker Tuke applied his religious principles, first to 
demented “friends” and later to foes also, partly to convert them, 
the great Pinel was not sure at times that he was dealing with 
sick people; he often marveled at their unbelievable endurance of 
physical hardship, and often cited the ability of schizophrenic 
women to sleep naked in subfreezing temperatures without 
suffering any ill effects. Were not these people more healthy, 
more resistant than ordinary human beings? Didn’t they have too 
much animal spirit in them? 

Naturally, it is impossible to discuss a book as complex as 
Madness and Civilization without oversimplifying and doing it an 
injustice. It is a tale of nuances, relative values, and delicate 
shadings. Yet, it is an impressive monument: in a dispassionate 
manner it marshals overwhelming evidence to dispel more 
effectively than many previous attempts the myth of mental 


7 



illness, and re-establishes folly and unreason in their rightful 
place as complex, human—too human—phenomena. The roots 
and symptoms of folly are being looked for today in psychology, 
medicine, and sociology, but they were and still are as present 
and important in art,* religion, ethics, and epistemology. 
Madness is really a manifestation of the “soul,” a variable concept 
which from antiquity to the twentieth century covered 
approximately what came to be known, after Freud, as the 
unconscious part of the human mind.f Only time will tell how 
much better students of the psyche can look at the future, after 
reading this sobering re-creation of yesteryear’s madness and the 
ineffective attempts of humanity to treat it by amputation, 
projections, prejudices, and segregation. 

JOSE BARCHILON, M.D. 


My only quarrel with the book is the lack of emphasis on the 
humoristic elements in psychoses and neuroses: i.e., the patient 
laughs at himself, or laughs at the world through his illness. 

t The fear and dread of madness is as real a factor in social and 
medical attitudes or measures as anxiety, symptoms, and 
resistance in coping with impulses from the individual 
unconscious; even though the author does not explicitly 
compare madness with the unconscious, he equates madness 
and dream activity so that the inference is clear enough. 


8 



PREFACE 


PASCAL: “Men are so necessarily mad, that not to be mad 
would amount to another form of madness.” And Dostoievsky, in 
his DIARY OF A WRITER: “It is not by confining one’s 
neighbor that one is convinced of one’s own sanity.” 

We have yet to write the history of that other form of madness, by 
which men,, in an act of sovereign reason, confine their neighbors, and 
communicate and recognize each other through the merciless language 
of non-madness; to define the moment of this conspiracy before it was 
permanently established in the realm of truth, before it was revived by 
the lyricism of protest. We must try to return, in history, to that zero 
point in the course of madness at which madness is an undifferentiated 
experience, a not yet divided experience of division itself We must 
describe, from the start of its trajectory, that “other form” which 
relegates Reason and Madness to one side or the other of its action as 
things henceforth external\ deaf to all exchange, and as though dead to 
one another. 

This is doubtless an uncomfortable region. To explore it we must 
renounce the convenience of terminal truths, and never let ourselves be 
guided by what we may know of madness. None of the concepts oj 
psychopathology, even and especially in the implicit process oj 
retrospections, can play an organizing role. What is constitutive is the 
