Savior of Caen (1735); Saint-Meins of Rennes opened shortly 
before the Revolution (1780). 

The phenomenon has European dimensions. The constitution 
of an absolute monarchy and the intense Catholic renaissance 
during the Counter-Reformation produced in France a very 
particular character of simultaneous competition and complicity 
between the government and the Church. Elsewhere it assumed 
quite different forms; but its localization in time was just as 
precise. The great hospitals, houses of confinement, 
establishments of religion and public order, of assistance and 
punishment, of governmental charity and welfare measures, are a 
phenomenon of the classical period: as universal as itself and 
almost contemporary with its birth. In German-speaking 
countries, it was marked by the creation of houses of correction, 


54 



the Zucht-hausern\ the first antedates the French houses of 
confinement (except for the Charite of Lyons); it opened in 
Hamburg around 1620. The others were founded in the second 
half of the century: Basel (1667), Breslau (1668), Frankfort 
(1684), Spandau (1684), Konigsberg (1691). They continued to 
multiply in the eighteenth century; Leipzig first in 1701, then 
Halle and Cassel in 1717 and 1720, later Brieg and Osnabriick 
(1756), and finally Torgau in 1771. 

In England the origins of confinement are more remote. An 
act of 1575 covering both “the punishment of vagabonds and the 
relief of the poor” prescribed the construction of houses oj 
correction , to number at least one per county. Their upkeep was 
to be assured by a tax, but the public was encouraged to make 
voluntary donations. It appears, however, that in this form the 
measure was scarcely ever applied, since, some years later, it was 
decided to authorize private enterprise: it was no longer 
necessary to obtain an official permit to open a hospital or a 
house of correction; anyone who pleased might do so. At the 
beginning of the seventeenth century, a general reorganization: a 
fine of five pounds was imposed on any justice of the peace who 
had not established one in the area of his jurisdiction; the houses 
were to install trades, workshops, and factories (milling, 
spinning, weaving) to aid in their upkeep and assure their 
inmates of work; a judge was to decide who was qualified to be 
sent there. The development of these “bridewells” was not too 
considerable; often they were gradually absorbed by the prisons 
to which they were attached; the practice never spread as far as 
Scotland. On the other hand, the workhouses were destined to 
