the particles are mobile, and even incapable of rest, but their 
activity is weak, without effect; when they are distilled, nothing 
remains in the alembic but an insipid phlegm. Do not acid 
vapors have the very properties of melancholia, whereas alcoholic 
vapors, always ready to burst into flame, suggest frenzy; and 
sulfurous vapors, agitated by a violent and continuous movement, 
indicate mania? If, then, one were to seek “the formal reason and 
the causes” of melancholia, one would consider the vapors that 
rise from the blood to the brain and that have degenerated into 
an acid and corrosive vapor. In appearance, it is a melancholia of 


133 


the spirits, a chemistry of the humors that oriented Willis’s 
analysis; but in fact, the principal clue is afforded by the 
immediate qualities of melancholic suffering: an impotent 
disorder, and then that shadow over the mind, along with that 
acid bitterness which corrodes thought and feeling alike. The 
chemistry of acids is not the explanation of the symptoms; it is a 
qualitative option: a phenomenology of melancholic experience. 

Some seventy years later, animal spirits lost their scientific 
prestige. Now it was from the body’s liquid and solid elements 
that the secret of disease was sought. The Medical Dictionary 
which Robert James published in England in 1743 proposes, 
under Mania , a comparative etiology of that disease and of 
melancholia: “It is evident that the brain is the seat ... of all 
diseases of this nature.... It is there that the Creator has fixed, 
although in a manner which is inconceivable, the lodging of the 
soul, the mind, genius, imagination, memory, and all sensations. 
... All these noble functions will be changed, depraved, 
diminished, and totally destroyed, if the blood and the humors 
corrupted in quality and quantity are no longer carried to the 
brain in a uniform and temperate manner, but instead circulate 
there with violence and impetuosity, or move about slowly, with 
difficulty or with languor.” It is this languishing flow, these 
choked vessels, this heavy, clogged blood that the heart labors to 
distribute throughout the organism, and which has difficulty 
penetrating into the very fine arterioles of the brain, where the 
circulation ought to be very rapid in order to maintain the 
movement of thought—it is all this distressing obstruction which 
explains melancholia. Heaviness, encumbrance—here again the 
primitive qualities guide analysis. The explanation becomes a 
transfer to the organism of qualities perceived in the condition, 
the conduct, the words of the sick person. We move from 
qualitative apprehension to supposed explanation. But it is this 
apprehension that continues to prevail and always wins out over 
theoretical coherence. Anne-Charles Lorry juxtaposes the two 


134 



main forms of medical explanation—by solids and by fluids— 
and ultimately causes them to intersect, thus distinguishing two 
kinds of melancholia. The one whose origin is in solids is 
nervous melancholia: a particularly strong sensation agitates the 
fibers which receive it; as a result, tension increases in the other 
fibers, which become more rigid and at the same time susceptible 
to further vibration. But should the sensation become even 
stronger, then the tension increases to such a degree in the other 
fibers that they become incapable of vibrating; the state of 
rigidity is such that the flow of blood is stopped and the animal 
spirits immobilized. Melancholia has set in. In the other form of 
disease, the “liquid form,” the humors are impregnated with 
black bile; they become thicker; clogged with these humors, the 
blood thickens and stagnates in the meninges until it compresses 
the principal organs of the nervous system. Then we find again 
the rigidity of the fibers, but in this case it is no more than a 
consequence of a humoral phenomenon. Lorry distinguishes two 
melancholias: actually it is the same group of qualities, affording 
melancholia its real unity, that he employs successively in two 
explanatory systems. Only the theoretical edifice has been 
doubled. The qualitative basis in experience remains the same. 

A symbolic unity formed by the languor of the fluids, by the 
darkening of the animal spirits and the shadowy twilight they 
spread over the images of things, by the viscosity of the blood 
that laboriously trickles through the vessels, by the thickening of 
vapors that have become blackish, deleterious, and acrid, by 
visceral functions that have become slow and somehow slimy— 
this unity, more a product of sensibility than of thought or 
theory, gives melancholia its characteristic stamp. 

It is this undertaking, more than faithful observation, which 
reorganizes melancholias symptoms and mode of appearance. 
The theme of a partial delirium increasingly disappears as a 
major symptom of melancholics in favor of qualitative data like 
sadness, bitterness, a preference for solitude, immobility. At the 


135 



end of the eighteenth century, all forms of madness without 
delirium, but characterized by inertia, by despair, by a sort of dull 
