in the literary experience of madness. 

In Shakespeare or Cervantes, madness still occupies an 
extreme place, in that it is beyond appeal. Nothing ever restores 
it either to truth or to reason. It leads only to laceration and 
thence to death. Madness, in its vain words, is not vanity; the 
void that fills it is a “disease beyond my practice,” as the doctor 
says about Lady Macbeth; it is already the plenitude of death; a 
madness that has no need of a physician, but only of divine 
mercy. The sweet joy Ophelia finally regains reconciles her with 
no happiness; her mad song is as close to the essential as the “cry 
of women” that announces through the corridors of Macbeth’s 
castle that “the Queen is dead.” Certainly Don Quixote’s death 
occurs in a peaceful landscape, which at the last moment has 
rejoined reason and truth. Suddenly the Knight’s madness has 
grown conscious of itself, and in his own eyes trickles out in 
nonsense. But is this sudden wisdom of his folly anything but “a 
new madness that had just come into his head”? The 
equivocation is endlessly reversible and cannot be resolved, 
ultimately, except by death itself. Madness dissipated can be only 
the same thing as the imminence of the end; “and even one of 
the signs by which they realized that the sick man was dying, was 
that he had returned so easily from madness to reason.” But 
death itself does not bring peace; madness will still triumph—a 
truth mockingly eternal, beyond the end of a life which yet had 
been delivered from madness by this very end. Ironically, Don 
Quixote’s insane life pursues and immortalizes him only by his 
insanity; madness is still the imperishable life of death: “Here lies 
the famous hidalgo who carried valor to such lengths that it was 
said death could not triumph over life by his demise.” 


42 



But very soon, madness leaves these ultimate regions where 
Cervantes and Shakespeare had situated it; and in the literature 
of the early seventeenth century it occupies, by preference, a 
median place; it thus constitutes the knot more than the 
denouement, the peripity rather than the final release. Displaced 
in the economy of narrative and dramatic structures, it authorizes 
the manifestation of truth and the return of reason. 

Thus madness is no longer considered in its tragic reality, in 
the absolute laceration that gives it access to the other world; but 
only in the irony of its illusions. It is not a real punishment, but 
only the image of punishment, thus a pretense; it can be linked 
only to the appearance of a crime or to the illusion of a death. 
Though Ariste, in Tristan l’Hermite’s La Folk du sage , goes mad 
at the news of his daughter s death, the fact is that she is not 
really dead; when Eraste, in Melite , sees himself pursued by the 
Eumenides and dragged before Minos, it is for a double crime 
which he might have committed, which he might have wanted to 
commit, but which in fact has not occasioned any real death. 
Madness is deprived of its dramatic seriousness; it is punishment 
or despair only in the dimension of error. Its dramatic function 
exists only insofar as we are concerned with a false drama; a 
chimerical form in which only supposed faults, illusory murders, 
ephemeral disappearances are involved. 

Yet this absence of seriousness does not keep madness from 
being essential—even more essential than it had been, for if it 
brings illusion to its climax, it is from this point that illusion is 
undone. In the madness in which his error has enveloped him, 
the character involuntarily begins to unravel the web. Accusing 
himself, he speaks the truth in spite of himself. In Melite , for 
example, all the stratagems the hero has accumulated to deceive 
others are turned against himself, and he becomes their first 
victim, believing that he is guilty of the deaths of his rival and his 
mistress. But in his delirium, he blames himself for having 
invented a whole series of love letters; the truth comes to light, in 


43 



and through madness, which, provoked by the illusion of a 
denouement, actually resolves the real imbroglio of which it is 
both cause and effect. To put it another way, madness is the false 
punishment of a false solution, but by its own virtue it brings to 
light the real problem, which can then be truly resolved. It 
conceals beneath error the secret enterprise of truth. It is this 
function of madness, both ambiguous and central, that the 
author of UOspital des fous employs when he portrays a pair of 
lovers who, to escape their pursuers, pretend to be mad and hide 
among madmen; in a fit of simulated dementia, the girl, who is 
dressed as a boy, pretends to believe she is a girl—which she 
really is—thus uttering, by the reciprocal neutralization of these 
two pretenses, the truth which in the end will triumph. 

Madness is the purest, most total form of qui pro quo\ it takes 
the false for the true, death for life, man for woman, the beloved 
for the Erinnys and the victim for Minos. But it is also the most 
rigorously necessary form of the qui pro quo in the dramatic 
economy, for it needs no external element to reach a true 
resolution. It has merely to carry its illusion to the point of truth. 
Thus it is, at the very heart of the structure, in its mechanical 
center, both a feigned conclusion, pregnant with a secret 
