
This theme of manic tension develops, beyond a medicine of 
solids, into intuitions that are still more qualitative. The rigidity 
of fibers in a maniac always belongs to a dry landscape; mania is 
regularly accompanied by a wasting of the humors, and by a 
general aridity in the entire organism. The essence of mania is 
desertic, sandy. Theophile Bonet, in his Sepulchretum 
anatomicum, declares that the brains of maniacs, insofar as he 
had been able to observe them, always seemed to be in a state of 
dryness, of hardness, and of friability. Later, Albrecht von Haller 
also found that the maniac’s brain was hard, dry, and brittle. 
Menuret repeats an observation of Forestier’s that clearly shows 


138 


how an excessive loss of a humor, by drying out the vessels and 
fibers, may provoke a state of mania; this was the case of a young 
man who “having married his wife in the summertime, became 
maniacal as a result of the excessive intercourse he had with her.” 

What some imagined or supposed, what others saw in a quasi¬ 
perception, Dufour proved, numbered, named. During an 
autopsy, he removed part of the medullary substance from the 
brain of a subject who had died in a state of mania; he cut out “a 
cube six lines in each direction” the weight of which was 3 j.g. 
Ill, while the same volume taken from an ordinary brain 
weighed 3 j.g. V: “this inequality in weight, which seems at first 
of little consequence, is no longer so slight if we consider the fact 
that the specific difference between the total mass of the brain of 
a madman and that of a normal man is around 7 gros less in the 
adult, in whom the brain’s entire mass ordinarily weighs three 
limes .” Mania’s dessication and lightness show even on the scale. 

Were not this internal dryness and this heat further proved by 
the ease with which maniacs endured great cold? It was an 
established fact that they had been seen walking naked in the 
snow, that there was no need to warm them when they were 
confined in the asylum, that they could even be cured by cold. 
Since Jean-Baptiste van Helmont, the immersion of maniacs in 
ice water had been widely practiced, and Menuret states that he 
knew a maniac who, having escaped from the prison where he 
was kept, “walked several leagues in a violent rain without a hat 
and almost without clothing, and who by this means recovered 
perfect health.” Montchau, who cured a maniac by “pouring ice 
water upon him, from as high above as possible,” was not 
astonished by so favorable a result; to explain it he united all the 
themes of organic calefaction that had succeeded and intersected 
each other since the seventeenth century: “One need not be 
surprised that ice water produces such a prompt and perfect cure 
precisely when boiling blood, furious bile, and mutinous liquors 
carried disturbance and irritation everywhere”; by the impression 


139 



of coldness, “the vessels contracted more violently and freed 
themselves of the liquors that crammed them; the irritation of 
the solid parts caused by the extreme heat of the liquors they 
contained ceased, and when the nerves relaxed, the course of the 
spirits that had proceeded irregularly from one side to the other 
was re-established in its natural state.” 

The world of melancholia was humid, heavy, and cold; that of 
mania was parched, dry, compounded of violence and fragility; a 
world which heat—unfelt but everywhere manifested—made 
arid, friable, and always ready to relax under the effect of a moist 
coolness. In the development of all these qualitative 
simplifications, mania attained both its full scope and its unity. It 
has doubtless remained what it was at the beginning of the 
seventeenth century, “fury without fever,” but beyond these two 
characteristics, which were still only descriptive , there developed a 
perceptual theme which was the real organizer of the clinical 
picture. Once the explanatory myths disappeared, and humors, 
spirits, solids, fluids no longer had any currency, there would 
remain only the schema of coherent qualities which would no 
longer even be named, and what this dynamics of heat and 
movement slowly formed into a constellation characteristic of 
mania would now be observed as a natural complex, as an 
immediate truth of psychological observation. What had been 
perceived as heat, imagined as agitation of spirits, conceived as 
fibrous tension, would henceforth be recognized in the 
neutralized transparency of psychological notions: exaggerated 
vivacity of internal impressions, rapidity in the association of 
ideas, inattention to the external world. De la Rive’s description 
already has this limpidity: “External objects do not produce upon 
the mind of a sufferer the same impression as upon the mind of a 
healthy man; these impressions are weak, and the sufferer rarely 
heeds them; his mind is almost entirely absorbed by the action of 
the ideas produced by the deranged state of his brain. These 
ideas have such a degree of vivacity that the sufferer believes they 


140 



