reminds each man of his truth; in a comedy where each man 
deceives the other and dupes himself, the madman is comedy to 
the second degree: the deception of deception; he utters, in his 
simpleton s language which makes no show of reason, the words 
of reason that release, in the comic, the comedy: he speaks love 
to lovers, the truth of life to the young, the middling reality of 
things to the proud, to the insolent, and to liars. Even the old 
feasts of fools, so popular in Flanders and northern Europe, were 
theatrical events, and organized into social and moral criticism, 
whatever they may have contained of spontaneous religious 

In learned literature, too, Madness or Folly was at work, at the 
very heart of reason and truth. It is Folly which embarks all men 
without distinction on its insane ship and binds them to the 
vocation of a common odyssey (Van Oestvoren’s Blauwe Schute , 
Brant’s Narrenschifj)\ it is Folly whose baleful reign Thomas 
Murner conjures up in his Narrenbeschworung ; it is Folly which 
gets the best of Love in Corroz’s satire Contre fol amour , or 
argues with Love as to which of the two comes first, which of the 
two makes the other possible, and triumphs in Louise Labe’s 
dialogue, Debat de folie et d'amour. Folly also has its academic 
pastimes; it is the object of argument, it contends against itself; it 



25 



is denounced, and defends itself by claiming that it is closer to 
happiness and truth than reason, that it is closer to reason than 
reason itself; Jakob Wimpfeling edits the Monopolium 
philo soph orum, and Judocus Gallus the Monopolium et societas , 
vulgo des lichtschijfs. Finally, at the center of all these serious 
games, the great humanist texts: the Moria rediviva of Flayder 
and Erasmus’s Praise of Folly. And confronting all these 
discussions, with their tireless dialectic, confronting these 
discourses constantly reworded and reworked, a long dynasty of 
images, from Hieronymus Bosch with The Cure of Madness and 
The Ship of Fools , down to Brueghel and his Dulle Griet\ 
woodcuts and engravings transcribe what the theater, what 
literature and art have already taken up: the intermingled themes 
of the Feast and of the Dance of Fools. Indeed, from the 
fifteenth century on, the face of madness has haunted the 
imagination of Western man. 

A sequence of dates speaks for itself: the Dance of Death in the 
Cimetiere des Innocents doubtless dates from the first years of 
the fifteenth century, the one in the Chaise-Dieu was probably 
composed around 1460; and it was in 1485 that Guyot Marchant 
published his Danse macabre. These sixty years, certainly, were 
dominated by all this grinning imagery of Death. And it was in 
1494 that Brant wrote the Narrenschiff in 1497 it was translated 
into Latin. In the very last years of the century Hieronymus 
Bosch painted his Ship of Fools. The Praise of Folly dates from 
1509. The order of succession is clear. 

Up to the second half of the fifteenth century, or even a little 
beyond, the theme of death reigns alone. The end of man, the 
end of time bear the face of pestilence and war. What overhangs 
human existence is this conclusion and this order from which 
nothing escapes. The presence that threatens even within this 
world is a fleshless one. Then in the last years of the century this 
enormous uneasiness turns on itself; the mockery of madness 
replaces death and its solemnity. From the discovery of that 


26 



necessity which inevitably reduces man to nothing, we have 
shifted to the scornful contemplation of that nothing which is 
existence itself Fear in the face of the absolute limit of death 
turns inward in a continuous irony; man disarms it in advance, 
making it an object of derision by giving it an everyday, tamed 
form, by constantly renewing it in the spectacle of life, by 
scattering it throughout the vices, the difficulties, and the 
absurdities of all men. Death’s annihilation is no longer anything 
because it was already everything, because life itself was only 
futility, vain words, a squabble of cap and bells. The head that 
will become a skull is already empty. Madness is the deja-la of 
death. 4 But it is also its vanquished presence, evaded in those 
everyday signs which, announcing that death reigns already, 
indicate that its prey will be a sorry prize indeed. What death 
unmasks was never more than a mask; to discover the grin of the 
skeleton, one need only lift off something that was neither 
beauty nor truth, but only a plaster and tinsel face. From the vain 
mask to the corpse, the same smile persists. But when the 
madman laughs, he already laughs with the laugh of death; the 
lunatic, anticipating the macabre, has disarmed it. The cries of 
Dulle Griet triumph, in the high Renaissance, over that Triumph 
of Death sung at the end of the Middle Ages on the walls of the 
Campo Santo. 

The substitution of the theme of madness for that of death 
does not mark a break, but rather a torsion within the same 
anxiety. What is in question is still the nothingness of existence, 
but this nothingness is no longer considered an external, final 
term, both threat and conclusion; it is experienced from within 
