bowels; the Greeks and Romans regarded it as a universal 
remedy.” 

The practice of immersion reaches far back into the history of 
madness; the baths taken at Epidaurus alone would bear witness 
to this; and cold applications of all kinds must have been current 
throughout antiquity, since Soranus of Ephesus, if we are to 
believe Caelius Aurelianus, already protested against their abuse. 
In the Middle Ages, the traditional treatment of a maniac was to 


178 



plunge him several times into water “until he had lost his 
strength and forgotten his fury.” Franciscus Sylvius recommends 
immersions in cases of melancholia or frenzy. And the story, 
accepted in the eighteenth century, of Van Helmonfs sudden 
discovery of the usefulness of hydrotherapy, was actually a 
reinterpretation. According to Menuret, this invention, 
supposedly dating from the middle of the seventeenth century, 
was the fortunate result of chance: a heavily chained madman 
was being transported on an open wagon; he managed, however, 
to free himself from his chains and jumped into a lake, tried to 
swim, fainted; when he was rescued, everyone thought he was 
dead, but he quickly recovered his spirits, which were abruptly 
restored to their natural order, and he “lived a long time without 
experiencing any further attack of madness.” This anecdote 
supposedly enlightened Van Helmont, who began to plunge the 
insane indiscriminately into the sea or into fresh water; “the only 
care that must be taken, is to plunge the sufferers into the water 
suddenly and unawares, and to keep them there for a long time. 
One need have no fear for their lives.” 

The truth of the story is of little importance; one thing is 
certain, which it conveys in the form of an anecdote: from the 
end of the seventeenth century, the water cure takes or regains its 
place as a major therapeutics of madness. When Doublet 
published his Instructions shortly before the Revolution, he 
prescribed, for the four major pathological forms he recognized 
(frenzy, mania, melancholia, imbecility), the regular use of baths, 
adding the use of cold showers for the first two. And at this 
period, Cheyne had already long since recommended that “all 
those who need to fortify their temperament” install baths in 
their house, and use them every two, three, or four days; or “if 
they have not the means, to bathe in some manner either in a 
lake or in running water, whenever they have occasion.” 

The advantages of water are evident, to a medicine dominated 
