its organic version, a certain force which, increasing, can lead to 
delirium, as if movement, instead of losing its strength in 
communicating itself, could involve other forces in its wake, and 
from them derive an additional vigor. This was how Sauvages 
explained the origin of madness: a certain impression of fear is 
linked to the congestion or the pressure of a certain medullary 
fiber; this fear is limited to an object, as this congestion is strictly 
localized. In proportion as this fear persists, the soul grants it 
more attention, increasingly isolating and detaching it from all 
else. But such isolation reinforces the fear, and the soul, having 
accorded it too special a condition, gradually tends to attach to it 
a whole series of more or less remote ideas: “It joins to this 
simple idea all those which are likely to nourish and augment it. 
For example, a man who supposes in his sleep that he is being 
accused of a crime, immediately associates this idea with that of 
its satellites—judges, executioners, the gibbet.” And from being 
thus burdened with all these new elements, involving them in its 


101 


course, the idea assumes a kind of additional power which 
ultimately renders it irresistible even to the most concerted 
efforts of the will. 

Madness, which finds its first possibility in the phenomenon 
of passion, and in the deployment of that double causality which, 
starting from passion itself, radiates both toward the body and 
toward the soul, is at the same time suspension of passion, 
breach of causality, dissolution of the elements of this unity. 
Madness participates both in the necessity of passion and in the 
anarchy of what, released by this very passion, transcends it and 
ultimately contests all it implies. Madness ends by being a 
movement of the nerves and muscles so violent that nothing in 
the course of images, ideas, or wills seems to correspond to it: 
this is the case of mania when it is suddenly intensified into 
convulsions, or when it degenerates into continuous frenzy. 
Conversely, madness can, in the body’s repose or inertia, 
generate and then maintain an agitation of the soul, without 
pause or pacification, as is the case in melancholia, where 
external objects do not produce the same impression on the 
sufferer s mind as on that of a healthy man; “his impressions are 
weak and he rarely pays attention to them; his mind is almost 
totally absorbed by the vivacity of certain ideas.”6 

Indeed this dissociation between the external movements of 
the body and the course of ideas does not mean that the unity of 
body and soul is necessarily dissolved, nor that each recovers its 
autonomy in madness. Doubtless the unity is compromised in its 
