the hypochondriac regions is completely dry: hypochondriacal 
melancholia is a “hot, dry” illness, caused by “humors of the like 
quality.” But some perceived no heat in either hysteria or 
hypochondria: the quality peculiar to these maladies was on the 
contrary languor, inertia, and a cold humidity like that of the 
stagnant humors: “I think that these affections [hypochondriacal 
and hysterical], when they last for some time, come from the 
fibers of the brain and the nerves when they are slack and 
therefore feeble, without action or elasticity; as a consequence of 
which the nervous fluid is impoverished and without force. ”12 
There is probably no text that bears better witness to the 
qualitative instability of hysteria than George Cheyne’s book The 
English Malady', according to Cheyne, the disease maintains its 
unity only in an abstract manner; its symptoms are dispersed into 
different qualitative regions and attributed to mechanisms that 
belong to each of these regions in its own right. All symptoms of 
spasm, cramp, and convulsion derive from a pathology of heat 
symbolized by “harmful, bitter, or acrimonious vapors.” On the 
contrary, all psychological or organic signs of weakness 
—“depression, syncopes, inactivity of the mind, lethargic torpor, 
melancholia, and sadness”—manifest a condition of fibers which 


151 


have become too humid or too weak, doubtless under the effect 
of cold, viscous, thick humors that obstruct the glands and the 
vessels, serous and sanguine alike. As for paralyses, they signify 
both a chilling and an immobilization of the fibers, “an 
interruption of vibrations,” frozen so to speak in the general 
inertia of solids. 

It was as difficult for the phenomena of hysteria and 
hypochondria to find a place within the compass of qualities as it 
was easy for mania and melancholia to be established there. 

The medicine of movement was just as indecisive in dealing 
with them, its analyses just as unstable. It was quite clear, at least 
to any perception that did not reject its own images, that mania 
was related to an excessive mobility; melancholia, on the 
contrary, to a diminution of movement. For hysteria and for 
hypochondria as well, the choice was a difficult one. Georg Ernst 
Stahl opts instead for an increasing heaviness of the blood, which 
becomes so abundant and so thick that it is no longer capable of 
circulating regularly through the portal vein; it has a tendency to 
stagnate, to collect there, and the crisis is a result “of the effort it 
makes to effect an issue either by the higher or the lower parts.” 
For Boerhaave, on the contrary, and for Van Swieten, hysterical 
movement is due to an excessive mobility of all the fluids, which 
become so volatile, so inconsistent, that they are agitated by the 
least movement: “In weak constitutions,” Van Swieten explains, 
“the blood is dissolved; it barely coagulates, the serum is thus 
without consistency, without quality; the lymph resembles the 
serum, as do the other fluids which the latter provides.... In this 
way, it becomes probable that the so-called immaterial hysterical 
affection and hypochondriacal disease derive from the 
dispositions of the particular state of the fibers.” It is to this 
sensibility, this mobility, that we must attribute the sufferings, 
the spasms, the singular pains so readily suffered by “young girls 
of pale complexion, and individuals too much given to study and 
meditation.” Hysteria is indiscriminately mobile or immobile, 


152 




fluid or dense, given to unstable vibrations or clogged by 
stagnant humors. No one has managed to discover the actual 
nature of its movements. 

We receive the same impression in the realm of chemical 
analogies: for Lange, hysteria is a product of fermentation, quite 
precisely of the fermentation “of salts, sent into different parts of 
the body,” with “the humors that are located there.” For others, 
it is of an alkaline nature. Michael Ettmiiller, on the contrary, 
considers that diseases of this kind belong to a chain of acid 
reactions, “the immediate cause being the acid rawness of the 
stomach; the chyle being acid, the quality of the blood is 
corrupted; it no longer furnishes spirits; the lymph is acid, the 
bile without strength; the nervous system suffers irritation, the 
digestive leaven, spoiled, is less volatile and too acid.” Viridet 
undertakes to reconstitute, apropos of “vapors which we 
experience,” a dialectic of alkalis and acids whose movements and 
violent collisions, in the brain and the nerves, provoke the signs 
of hysteria and hypochondria. Certain particularly volatile animal 
spirits are alkaline salts that move with great speed and transform 
themselves into vapors when they become too tenuous; but there 
are other vapors that are volatilized acids; the ether gives these 
latter enough movement to carry them to the brain and the 
nerves where, “encountering the alkalis, they cause infinite ills.” 

Strange, the qualitative instability of these hysterical and 
hypochondriacal illnesses; strange, the confusion of their 
dynamic properties and the secret nature of their chemistry! To 
the very degree that the diagnosis of mania and melancholia 
seemed simple in the context of qualities, so the decipherment of 
these illnesses seemed hesitant. No doubt, this imaginary 
