them away, their departure and embarkation do not assume their 
entire significance on the plane of social utility or security. Other 
meanings much closer to rite are certainly present; and we can 
still discern some traces of them. Thus access to churches was 
denied to madmen, although ecclesiastical law did not deny them 
the use of the sacraments. The Church takes no action against a 
priest who goes mad; but in Nuremberg in 1421 a mad priest 
was expelled with particular solemnity, as if the impurity was 
multiplied by the sacred nature of his person, and the city put on 


21 



its budget the money given him as a viaticum. It happened that 
certain madmen were publicly whipped, and in the course of a 
kind of a game they were chased in a mock race and driven out 
of the city with quarterstaff blows. So many signs that the 
expulsion of madmen had become one of a number of ritual 
exiles. 

Thus we better understand the curious implication assigned to 
the navigation of madmen and the prestige attending it. On the 
one hand, we must not minimize its incontestable practical 
effectiveness: to hand a madman over to sailors was to be 
permanently sure he would not be prowling beneath the city 
walls; it made sure that he would go far away; it made him a 
prisoner of his own departure. But water adds to this the dark 
mass of its own values; it carries off, but it does more: it purifies. 
Navigation delivers man to the uncertainty of fate; on water, 
each of us is in the hands of his own destiny; every embarkation 
is, potentially, the last. It is for the other world that the madman 
sets sail in his fools’ boat; it is from the other world that he 
comes when he disembarks. The madman’s voyage is at once a 
rigorous division and an absolute Passage. In one sense, it simply 
develops, across a half-real, half-imaginary geography, the 
madman’s liminal position on the horizon of medieval concern— 
a position symbolized and made real at the same time by the 
madman’s privilege of being confined within the city gates', his 
exclusion must enclose him; if he cannot and must not have 
another prison than the threshold itself, he is kept at the point of 
passage. He is put in the interior of the exterior, and inversely. A 
highly symbolic position, which will doubtless remain his until 
our own day, if we are willing to admit that what was formerly a 
visible fortress of order has now become the castle of our 
conscience. 

Water and navigation certainly play this role. Confined on the 
ship, from which there is no escape, the madman is delivered to 
