madness, thus making closer, more immediate, the constraint 
that was already rampant in classical confinement. There, the 
religious and moral milieu was imposed from without, in such a 
way that madness was controlled, not cured. At the Retreat, 
religion was part of the movement which indicated in spite of 
everything the presence of reason in madness, and which led 
from insanity to health. Religious segregation has a very precise 
meaning: it does not attempt to preserve the sufferers from the 
profane presence of non-Quakers, but to place the insane 
individual within a moral element where he will be in debate 
with himself and his surroundings: to constitute for him a milieu 
where, far from being protected, he will be kept in a perpetual 
anxiety, ceaselessly threatened by Law and Transgression. 

“The principle of fear, which is rarely decreased by insanity, is 
considered as of great importance in the management of the 

patients.” 3 Fear appears as an essential presence in the asylum. 
Already an ancient figure, no doubt, if we think of the terrors of 
confinement. But these terrors surrounded madness from the 
outside, marking the boundary of reason and unreason, and 
enjoying a double power: over the violence of fury in order to 
contain it, and over reason itself to hold it at a distance; such fear 
was entirely on the surface. The fear instituted at the Retreat is 
of great depth; it passes between reason and madness like a 
mediation, like an evocation of a common nature they still share, 
and by which it could link them together. The terror that once 
reigned was the most visible sign of the alienation of madness in 


256 


the classical period; fear was now endowed with a power of 
disalienation, which permitted it to restore a primitive complicity 
between the madman and the man of reason. It re-established a 
solidarity between them. Now madness would never—could 
never—cause fear again; it would be afraid , without recourse or 
return, thus entirely in the hands of the pedagogy of good sense, 
of truth, and of morality. 

Samuel Tuke tells how he received at the Retreat a maniac, 
young and prodigiously strong, whose seizures caused panic in 
those around him and even among his guards. When he entered 
the Retreat he was loaded with chains; he wore handcuffs; his 
clothes were attached by ropes. He had no sooner arrived than all 
his shackles were removed, and he was permitted to dine with 
the keepers; his agitation immediately ceased; “his attention 
appeared to be arrested by his new situation.” He was taken to 
his room; the keeper explained that the entire house was 
organized in terms of the greatest liberty and the greatest 
comfort for all, and that he would not be subject to any 
constraint so long as he did nothing against the rules of the 
house or the general principles of human morality. For his part, 
the keeper declared he had no desire to use the means of 
coercion at his disposal. “The maniac was sensible of the 
kindness of his treatment. He promised to restrain himself '” He 
sometimes still raged, shouted, and frightened his companions. 
The keeper reminded him of the threats and promises of the first 
day; if he did not control himself, it would be necessary to go 
back to the old ways. The patient’s agitation would then increase 
for a while, and then rapidly decline. “He would listen with 
attention to the persuasions and arguments of his friendly visitor. 
After such conversations, the patient was generally better for 
some days or a week.” At the end of four months, he left the 
Retreat, entirely cured. Here fear is addressed to the invalid 
directly, not by instruments but in speech; there is no question of 
limiting a liberty that rages beyond its bounds, but of marking 


257 



out and glorifying a region of simple responsibility where any 
manifestation of madness will be linked to punishment. The 
obscure guilt that once linked transgression and unreason is thus 
shifted; the madman, as a human being originally endowed with 
reason, is no longer guilty of being mad; but the madman, as a 
madman, and in the interior of that disease of which he is no 
longer guilty, must feel morally responsible for everything within 
him that may disturb morality and society, and must hold no one 
but himself responsible for the punishment he receives. The 
assignation of guilt is no longer the mode of relation that obtains 
between the madman and the sane man in their generality; it 
becomes both the concrete form of coexistence of each madman 
with his keeper, and the form of awareness that the madman 
must have of his own madness. 

We must therefore re-evaluate the meanings assigned to 
Tuke’s work: liberation of the insane, abolition of constraint, 
constitution of a human milieu—these are only justifications. 
The real operations were different. In fact Tuke created an 
asylum where he substituted for the free terror of madness the 
stifling anguish of responsibility; fear no longer reigned on the 
other side of the prison gates, it now raged under the seals of 
conscience. Tuke now transferred the age-old terrors in which 
the insane had been trapped to the very heart of madness. The 
asylum no longer punished the madman’s guilt, it is true; but it 
did more, it organized that guilt; it organized it for the madman 
