an opposition of organic to psychological. Cartesian or anti- 
Cartesian, classical medicine never introduced Descartes’s 
metaphysical dualism into anthropology. And when the 
separation did occur, it was not by a renewed loyalty to the 
Meditations , but by a new privilege accorded to transgression. 
Only the use of punishment distinguished, in treating the mad, 
the medications of the body from those of the soul. A purely 
psychological medicine was made possible only when madness 
was alienated in guilt. 

Of this, however, a whole aspect of medical practice during 
the classical period might stand as a long denial. The 
psychological element, in its purity, seems to have its place 
among the techniques. How else explain the importance attached 
to exhortation, to persuasion, to reasoning, to that whole 
dialogue in which the classical physician engages with his 
patient, independently of the cure by bodily remedies? How 


193 


explain that Sauvages can write, in agreement with all his 
contemporaries: “One must be a philosopher to be able to cure 
the diseases of the soul. For as the origin of these diseases is 
nothing more than a violent desire for a thing which the sufferer 
envisages as a good, it is part of the physician’s duty to prove to 
him by solid reasons that what he desires so ardently is an 
apparent good but a real evil, in order to make him renounce his 
error.” 

In fact this approach to madness is neither more nor less 
psychological than any of those we have already discussed. 
Language, the formulations of truth or morality, are in direct 
contact with the body; and it is Bienville again, in his treatise on 
Nymphomania , who shows how the adoption or the rejection of 
an ethical principle can directly modify the course of organic 
processes. However, there is a difference in nature between those 
techniques which consist in modifying the qualities common to 
body and soul, and those which consist in treating madness by 
discourse. In the first case, the technique is one of metaphors, at 
the level of a disease that is a deterioration of nature; in the 
second, the technique is one of language, at the level of a 
madness perceived as reason s debate with itself. The technique, 
in this last form, functions in a domain where madness is 
“treated”—in all the senses of the word—in terms of truth and 
error. In short, there always existed, throughout the classical 
period, a juxtaposition of two technical universes in the 
therapeutics of madness. One, which is based on an implicit 
mechanics of qualities, and which addresses madness as 
