unreason with all these new values: instead of making blindness 
the condition of possibility for all the manifestations of madness, 
it describes blindness, the blindness of madness, as the 
psychological effect of a moralfault. And thereby compromises what 
had been essential in the experience of unreason. What had been 
blindness would become unconsciousness, what had been error 
would become fault, and everything in madness that designated 
the paradoxical manifestation of non-being would become the 
natural punishment of a moral evil. In short, that whole vertical 
hierarchy which constituted the structure of classical madness, 
from the cycle of material causes to the transcendence of 
delirium, would now collapse and spread over the surface of a 
domain which psychology and morality would soon occupy 


168 


together and contest with each other. 

The “scientific psychiatry” of the nineteenth century became 
possible. 

It was in these “diseases of the nerves” and in these “hysterias,” 
which would soon provoke its irony, that this psychiatry took its 
origin. 


169 



VI 



170 


DOCTORSAND 

PATIENTS 


THE therapeutics of madness did not function in the hospital, 
whose chief concern was to sever or to “correct.” And yet in the 
non-hospital domain, treatment continued to develop 
throughout the classical period: long cures for madness were 
elaborated whose aim was not so much to care for the soul as to 
cure the entire individual, his nervous fiber as well as the course 
of his imagination. The madman s body was regarded as the 
visible and solid presence of his disease: whence those physical 
cures whose meaning was borrowed from a moral perception and 
a moral therapeutics of the body. 

1. Consolidation. There exists in madness, even in its most 
agitated forms, an element of weakness. If in madness the spirits 
are subjected to irregular movements, it is because they have not 
enough strength or weight to follow the gravity of their natural 
course; if spasms and convulsions so often occur in nervous 
illnesses, it is because the fiber is too mobile, or too irritable, or 
too sensitive to vibrations; in any case, it lacks robustness. 
Beneath the apparent violence of madness, which sometimes 
seems to multiply the strength of maniacs to considerable 
proportions, there is always a secret weakness, an essential lack of 
resistance; the madman s frenzies, in fact, are only a passive 
violence. What is wanted, then, is a cure that will give the spirits 
or the fibers a vigor, but a calm vigor, a strength no disorder can 
mobilize, since from the start it will be subject to the course of 
natural law. More than the image of vivacity and vigor, it is one 
of robustness that prevails, enveloping the theme in a new 
resistance, a young elasticity, but subjugated and already 
domesticated. A force must be found within nature to reinforce 
nature itself. 


171 



The ideal remedy would “take the part” of the spirits, and 
“help them conquer the cause that ferments them.” To take the 
part of the spirits would be to struggle against the vain agitation 
to which they are subject in spite of themselves; it would also 
permit them to escape from all the chemical ebullition that heats 
and troubles them; finally it would give them enough solidity to 
resist the vapors that try to suffocate them, to make them inert, 
and to carry them off in their whirlwind. Against the vapors, the 
spirits are reinforced “by the most stinking odors”; disagreeable 
sensation vivifies the spirits, which in a sense rebel and 
vigorously flock to the place where the assault must be repelled; 
to this effect “asafetida, oil of amber, burnt leather and feathers 
will be used—that is, whatever can provide the soul with strong 
and disagreeable feelings.” Against fermentation, theriac must be 
given, “anti-epileptic spirits of Charras,” or best of all, the 
famous Queen of Hungary water; 1 acidity disappears and the 
spirits regain their true influence. Finally, to restore their true 
mobility, Lange recommends that the spirits be subjected to 
sensations and movements that are both agreeable, measured, 
and regular: “When the animal spirits are dispersed and 
