structures and symbols, would be, par excellence , inadapted and 
out of time. And exactly where animality manifested a presence 
without history, an eternal return, would slowly reappear the 
immemorial scars of old hatreds, old family profanations, the 
forgotten signs of incest and punishment. 

Pinel advocates no religious segregation. Or rather, a 
segregation that functions in the opposite direction from that 
practiced by Tuke. The benefits of the renovated asylum were 
offered to all, or almost all, except the fanatics “who believe 
themselves inspired and seek to make converts.” Bicetre and La 
Salpetriere, according to Pinefs intention, form a complementary 
figure to the Retreat. 

Religion must not be the moral substratum of life in the 
asylum, but purely and simply a medical object: “Religious 
opinions in a hospital for the insane must be considered only in a 
strictly medical relation, that is, one must set aside all other 
considerations of public worship and political belief, and 
investigate only whether it is necessary to oppose the exaltation 
of ideas and feelings that may originate in this source, in order to 
effect the cure of certain alienated minds.”9 A source of strong 
emotions and terrifying images which it arouses through fears of 
the Beyond, Catholicism frequently provokes madness; it 
generates delirious beliefs, entertains hallucinations, leads men to 
despair and to melancholia. We must not be surprised if, 
“examining the registers of the insane asylum at Bicetre, we find 
inscribed there many priests and monks, as well as country 
people maddened by a frightening picture of the future.” Still less 
surprising is it to see the number of religious madnesses vary. 
Under the Old Regime and during the Revolution, the strength 
of superstitious beliefs, or the violence of the struggles in which 
the Republic opposed the Catholic Church, multiplied 
melancholias of religious origin. With the return of peace, the 


266 


Concordat having erased the struggles, these forms of delirium 
disappeared; in the Year X, 50 per cent of the melancholics in 
Bicetre were suffering from religious madness, 33 per cent the 
following year, and only 18 per cent in the Year XII. The asylum 
must thus be freed from religion and from all its iconographic 
connections; “melancholics by devotion” must not be allowed 
their pious books; experience “teaches that this is the surest 
means of perpetuating insanity or even of making it incurable, 
and the more such permission is granted, the less we manage to 
calm anxiety and scruples.” Nothing takes us further from Tuke 
and his dreams of a religious community that would at the same 
time be a privileged site of mental cures, than this notion of a 
neutralized asylum, purified of those images and passions to 
which Christianity gave birth and which made the mind wander 
toward illusion, toward error, and soon toward delirium and 
hallucinations. 

But Pinefs problem was to reduce the iconographic forms, not 
the moral content of religion. Once “filtered,” religion possesses 
a disalienating power that dissipates the images, calms the 
passions, and restores man to what is most immediate and 
essential: it can bring him closer to his moral truth. And it is 
here that religion is often capable of effecting cures. Pinel relates 
several Voltairean stories. One, for example, of a woman of 
twenty-five, “of strong constitution, united in wedlock to a weak 
and delicate man”; she suffered “quite violent fits of hysteria, 
imagining she was possessed by a demon who followed her in 
different shapes, sometimes emitting bird noises, sometimes 
mournful sounds and piercing cries.” Happily, the local cure was 
more concerned with natural religion than learned in the 
techniques of exorcism; he believed in curing through the 
benevolence of nature; this “enlightened man, of kindly and 
persuasive character, gained ascendancy over the patient’s mind 
and managed to induce her to leave her bed, to resume her 
domestic tasks, and even to spade her garden.... This was 


267 



followed by the most fortunate effects, and by a cure that lasted 
three years.” Restored to the extreme simplicity of this moral 
content, religion could not help conniving with philosophy and 
with medicine, with all the forms of wisdom and science that can 
restore the reason in a disturbed mind. There are even instances 
of religion serving as a preliminary treatment, preparing for what 
will be done in the asylum: take the case of the young girl “of an 
ardent temperament, though very docile and pious” who was 
torn between “the inclinations of her heart and the severe 
principles of her conduct”; her confessor, after having vainly 
counseled her to attach herself to God, proposed examples of a 
firm and measured holiness, and “offered her the best remedy 
against high passions: patience and time.” Taken to La 
Salpetriere, she was treated, on Pinefs orders, “according to the 
same moral principles,” and her illness proved “of very short 
duration.” Thus the asylum assimilates not the social theme of a 
religion in which men feel themselves brothers in the same 
communion and the same community, but the moral power of 
consolation, of confidence, and a docile fidelity to nature. It must 
resume the moral enterprise of religion, exclusive of its fantastic 
