

of void in its place; the physician, entering into the delirium, 
agreed at the sufferer’s request to fill up this space, and placed 
upon his head a great ball of lead. Soon the discomfort that 
resulted from the painful weight convinced the invalid that he 
had a head. Ultimately the ruse and its function of comic 
reduction can be assured, with the complicity of the physician 
but without any other direct intervention on his part, by the 
spontaneous reaction of the sufferer’s organism. In the case cited 
above of the melancholic who was really dying because he would 
not eat, believing himself already dead, the theatrical 
representation of a dead men’s banquet incited him to eat; this 
nourishment restored him, “the consumption of food made him 
quieter,” and the organic disorder thus disappearing, the delirium 
which was indissociably cause and effect disappeared forthwith. 
Thus the real death that would have resulted from the imaginary 
death was avoided by reality, by the mere representation of 
unreal death. The exchange of non-being with itself is carried 
out in this ingenious play: the non-being of delirium is turned 
against the being of the illness, and suppresses it by the simple 
fact that it is driven out of the delirium by dramatic 
representation. The fulfillment of delirium’s non-being in being 
is able to suppress it as non-being itself; and this by the pure 
mechanism of its internal contradiction—a mechanism that is 
both a play on words and a play of illusion, games of language 
and of the image; the delirium, in effect, is suppressed as non- 
being since it becomes a perceived form of being; but since the 
being of delirium is entirely in its non-being, it is suppressed as 
delirium. And its confirmation in theatrical fantasy restores it to 
a truth which, by holding it captive in reality, drives it out of 
reality itself, and makes it disappear in the non-delirious 
discourse of reason. 

3. The Return to the Immediate. Since madness is illusion, the 
cure of madness, if it is true that such a cure can be effected by 
theater, can also and still more directly be effected by the 


201 



suppression of theater. To entrust madness and its empty world 
directly to the plenitude of a nature which does not deceive 
because its immediacy does not acknowledge non-being, is to 
deliver madness both to its own truth (since madness, as a 
disease, is after all only a natural being), and to its closest 
contradiction (since delirium, as appearance without content, is 
the very contrary of the often secret and invisible wealth of 
