power of the heart and the vessels.” 

But in other qualitative intuitions, the relationship is reversed; 
here it is heat that dries up water s humectant properties, while 
cold ceaselessly preserves and renews them. Against diseases of 
the nerves due to “a shriveling of the nervous system” and “the 
dryness of the membranes,” Pomme does not recommend hot 
baths—which abet the heat that reigns in the body—but tepid or 
cold baths that can permeate the tissues of the organism and 
restore their suppleness. Is this not the method spontaneously 
practiced in America? And are not its effects, its very mechanism 
visible to the naked eye in the development of the cure, since at 
the most acute point of the crisis, the sufferers float in the water 
of the bath—to such an extent has internal heat rarified the air 
and the liquids of their bodies; yet if they remain a long time in 
the bath water, “three, four, or even six hours a day,” then 
relaxation takes place, the water gradually impregnates the 
membranes and the fibers, the body becomes heavy and sinks 
naturally to the bottom. 

At the end of the eighteenth century, the powers of water 
wane in the very excess of its qualitative versatility: cold, it can 
heat; hot, it can cool; instead of humidifying, it is even capable of 
solidifying, of petrifying by cold, or of sustaining a fire with its 
own heat. In it, all the values of beneficence and maleficence 


182 


indiscriminately combine. It is endowed with all possible 
complicities. In medical thought, it forms a therapeutic theme 
which can be used and manipulated unconditionally, and whose 
effect can be understood in the most diverse physiologies and 
pathologies. It has so many values, so many different modes of 
action, that it can confirm anything, cancel anything. No doubt 
it was this very polyvalence, with all the disputes it generated, 
that finally neutralized water. By Pinefs day, water was still used, 
but it had again become entirely limpid, its qualitative overtones 
had been eliminated, and its mode of action could no longer be 
anything but mechanical. 

Showers, hitherto less used than baths and drinks, now 
become the favored technique. And paradoxically, water regains, 
beyond all the physiological variations of the preceding epoch, its 
simple function of purification. The only quality attributed to it 
is violence, an irresistible flow washing away all the impurities 
that form madness; by its own curative power, it reduces the 
individual to his simplest possible expression, to his merest and 
purest form of existence, thus affording him a second birth; it is a 
matter, Pinel explains, “of destroying even the smallest traces of 
the extravagant ideas of the insane, which can be done only by 
obliterating, so to speak, these ideas in a state close to that of 
death.” Whence the famous techniques used in asylums like 
Charenton at the end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the 
nineteenth century: the shower proper—“the insane man, 
fastened to an armchair, was placed beneath a reservoir filled 
with cold water which poured directly upon his head through a 
large pipe”; and surprise baths—“the sufferer came down the 
corridors to the ground floor, and arrived in a square vaulted 
room, in which a pool had been constructed; he was pushed over 

backwards and into the water.”? Such violence promised the 
rebirth of a baptism. 

4. Regulation of Movement. If it is true that madness is the 


183 


irregular agitation of the spirits, the disordered movement of 
fibers and ideas, it is also obstruction of the body and the soul, 
stagnation of the humors, immobilization of the fibers in their 
rigidity, fixation of ideas and attention on a theme that gradually 
prevails over all others. It is then a matter of restoring to the 
mind and to the spirits, to the body and to the soul, the mobility 
which gives them life. This mobility, however, must be measured 
and controlled; it must not become a vain agitation of the fibers 
which no longer obey the stimuli of the exterior world. The 
animating idea of this therapeutic theme is the restitution of a 
movement that corresponds to the prudent mobility of the 
exterior world. Since madness can be dumb immobility, 
obstinate fixation as well as disorder and agitation, the cure 
consists in reviving in the sufferer a movement that will be both 
regular and real, in the sense that it will obey the rules of the 
world’s movements. 

Physicians of the period evoke the firm belief of the ancients, 
who attributed salutary effects to various forms of walking and 
running: simple walking, which both limbers and strengthens the 
body; running at an ever increasing speed, which better 
distributes the juices and humors throughout the body, at the 
same time that it diminishes the weight of the organs; running 
fully dressed, which heats and loosens the tissues, softens too 
rigid fibers. Sydenham especially recommends horseback riding 
in cases of melancholia and hypochondria: “But the best thing I 
have yet found to fortify and animate the blood and the spirits, is 
to ride almost every day, and in this manner to make rather long 
excursions in the fresh air. This exercise, by the extraordinary 
