a full economic recession. The act of 1610 recommended only 
joining certain mills and weaving and carding shops to all houses 
of correction in order to occupy the pensioners. But what had 
been a moral requirement became an economic tactic when 
commerce and industry recovered after 1651, the economic 
situation having been re-established by the Navigation Act and 
the lowering of the discount rate. All able-bodied manpower was 
to be used to the best advantage, that is, as cheaply as possible. 
When John Carey established his workhouse project in Bristol, 
he ranked the need for work first: “The poor of both 
sexes ... may be employed in beating hemp, dressing and 
spinning flax, or in carding wool and cotton.” At Worcester, they 
manufactured clothes and stuffs; a workshop for children was 
established. All of which did not always proceed without 
difficulties. It was suggested that the workhouses might enter the 
local industries and markets, on the principle perhaps that such 
cheap production would have a regulatory effect on the sale 
price. But the manufactories protested. Daniel Defoe noticed 
that by the effect of the too easy competition of the workhouses, 
poverty was created in one area on the pretext of suppressing it in 
another; “it is giving to one what you take away from another; 
putting a vagabond in an honest man’s employment, and putting 
diligence on the tenters to find out some other work to maintain 
his family.” Faced with this danger of competition, the 
authorities let the work gradually disappear. The pensioners 
could no longer earn even enough to pay for their upkeep; at 
times it was necessary to put them in prison so that they might at 
least have free bread. As for the bridewells, as Howard attested, 
there were few “in which any work is done, or can be done. The 
prisoners have neither tools, nor materials of any kind: but spend 
their time in sloth, profaneness and debauchery.” 

When the Hopital General was created in Paris, it was 


63 



intended above all to suppress beggary, rather than to provide an 
occupation for the internees. It seems, however, that Colbert, 
like his English contemporaries, regarded assistance through 
work as both a remedy to unemployment and a stimulus to the 
development of manufactories. In any case, in the provinces the 
directors were to see that the houses of charity had a certain 
economic significance. “All the poor who are capable of working 
must, upon work days, do what is necessary to avoid idleness, 
which is the mother of all evils, as well as to accustom them to 
honest toil and also to earning some part of their sustenance.” 

Sometimes there were even arrangements which permitted 
private entrepreneurs to utilize the manpower of the asylums for 
their own profit. It was stipulated, for example, according to an 
agreement made in 1708, that an entrepreneur should furnish 
the Charite of Tulle with wool, soap, and coal, and in return the 
establishment would redeliver the wool carded and spun. The 
profit was divided between the entrepreneur and the hospital. 
Even in Paris, several attempts were made to transform the 
buildings of the Hopital General into factories. If we can believe 
the author of an anonymous memoire that appeared in 1790, at 
La Pitie “all the varieties of manufacture that could be offered to 
the capital” were attempted; finally, “in a kind of despair, a 
manufacture was undertaken of a sort of lacing found to be the 
least costly.” Elsewhere, such efforts were scarcely more fruitful. 
Numerous efforts were made at Bicetre: manufacture of thread 
and rope, mirror polishing, and especially the famous “great 
well.” An attempt was even made, in 1781, to substitute teams of 
prisoners for the horses that brought up the water, in relay from 
five in the morning to eight at night: “What reason could have 
determined this strange occupation? Was it that of economy or 
simply the necessity of busying the prisoners? If the latter, would 
it not have been better to occupy them with work more useful 
both for them and for the hospital? If for reasons of economy, we 


64 



are a long way from finding any.” During the entire eighteenth 
century, the economic significance Colbert wanted to give the 
Hopital General continued to recede; that center of forced labor 
would become a place of privileged idleness. “What is the source 
of the disorders at Bicetre?” the men of the Revolution were 
again to ask. And they would supply the answer that had already 
been given in the seventeenth century: “It is idleness. What is the 
means of remedying it? Work.” 

The classical age used confinement in an equivocal manner, 
making it play a double role: to reabsorb unemployment, or at 
least eliminate its most visible social effects, and to control costs 
when they seemed likely to become too high; to act alternately 
on the manpower market and on the cost of production. As it 
turned out, it does not seem that the houses of confinement were 
able to play effectively the double role that was expected of them. 
If they absorbed the unemployed, it was mostly to mask their 
poverty, and to avoid the social or political disadvantages of 
agitation; but at the very moment the unemployed were herded 
into forced-labor shops, unemployment increased in neighboring 
regions or in similar areas. As for the effect on production costs, 
