configurations in which man in any case corrupts his truth, but 
between which the nineteenth century, after Hegel, soon lost all 
trace of resemblance. 


231 



VIII 



232 


THE NEW DIVISION 


EVERY psychiatrist, every historian yielded, at the beginning of 
the nineteenth century, to the same impulse of indignation; 
everywhere we find the same outrage, the same virtuous censure: 
“No one blushed to put the insane in prison/’ And Esquirol, 
listing the fortress of Ha in Bordeaux, the houses of correction in 
Toulouse and Rennes, the “Bicetres” still existing in Poitiers, in 
Caen, in Amiens, the “Chateau” of Angers, continues: 
“Moreover, there are few prisons where the raving mad are not to 
be found; these unfortunates are chained in dungeons beside 
criminals. What a monstrous association! The calm madmen are 
treated worse than malefactors.” 

The entire century echoes him; in England, it was the Tukes, 
who had turned historians and apologists for their ancestral 
occupation; in Germany, after Wagnitz, it was Reil who groaned 
over those wretches “thrown, like State criminals, into dungeons 
where the eye of humanity never penetrates.” The age of 
positivism, for over half a century, constantly claimed to have 
been the first to free the mad from a lamentable confusion with 
the felonious, to separate the innocence of unreason from the 
guilt of crime. 

Yet it is simple enough to show the vanity of this claim. For 
years the same protests had been raised; before Reil, there had 
been Franck: “Those who have visited the insane asylums of 
Germany recall with dread what they have seen. One is horrified 
upon entering these asylums of misery and affliction; one hears 
only cries of despair, yet here dwells the man distinguished by his 
talents and his virtues.” Before Esquirol, before Pinel, there had 
been La Rochefoucauld-Liancourt, there had been Tenon; and 
before them, an incessant murmur throughout the eighteenth 
century, composed of insistent protests, lodged year after year 


233 



even by those whom one would have thought the most 
indifferent, the most eager perhaps that such a confusion should 
subsist. Twenty-five years before the exclamations of a Pinel, we 
must invoke Malesherbes “visiting the State prisons with the 
intention of breaking down their gates. Prisoners whom he 
found to be insane ... were sent to houses where the society, the 
exercise, and the care he had scrupulously prescribed would be 
sure, he said, to cure them.” Still earlier in the century, and in a 
lower voice, there had been all those directors, those bursars, 
those overseers who from generation to generation always asked 
and sometimes achieved the same thing: the separation of 
madmen from convicts; there had been the Prior of La Charite 
in Senlis who begged the police to remove several prisoners and 
confine them instead in any of several fortresses; there had been 
that overseer of the House of Correction in Brunswick who 
asked—and this was only in 1713—that the madmen not be 
allowed to mingle with the internees assigned to the workshops. 
Had not what the nineteenth century formulated so 
ostentatiously, with all the resources of its pathos, already been 
whispered and indefatigably repeated by the eighteenth? Did 
Esquirol and Reil and the Tukes do anything more than shout at 
the top of their lungs what had been, for years, commonplaces of 
asylum practice? The slow emigration of the mad which we have 
mentioned, from 1720 to the Revolution, was probably no more 
than the most visible effect of that practice. 

And yet, let us listen to what was being said in this half¬ 
silence. When the Prior of Senlis asked that madmen be 
separated from certain convicts, what were his arguments? “He is 
deserving of mercy, as well as two or three others who would be 
better off in some citadel, because of the company of six others 
who are mad, and who torment them night and day.” And the 
meaning of this sentence would be so clearly understood by the 
police that the internees in question would be set free. And the 
demands of the Brunswick overseer have the same meaning: the 


234 



workshop is disturbed by the cries and the confusion of the 
insane; their frenzy is a perpetual danger, and it would be better 
