In any case, it was this animality of madness which 
confinement glorified, at the same time that it sought to avoid 
the scandal inherent in the immorality of the unreasonable. Which 
reveals the distance established in the classical age between 
madness and the other forms of unreason, even if it is true that 
from a certain point of view they had been identified or 
assimilated. If a whole range of unreason was reduced to silence, 
but madness left free to speak the language of its scandal, what 
lesson could it teach which unreason as a whole was not capable 
of transmitting? What meaning had the frenzies and all the fury 
of the insane, which could not be found in the—probably more 
sensible—remarks of the other internees? In what respect then 
was madness more particularly significant? 

Beginning with the seventeenth century, unreason in the most 
general sense no longer had much instructive value. That 
perilous reversibility of reason which was still so close for the 
Renaissance was to be forgotten, and its scandals were to 
disappear. The great theme of the madness of the Cross, which 
belonged so intimately to the Christian experience of the 
Renaissance, began to disappear in the seventeenth century, 


89 



despite Jansenism and Pascal. Or rather, it subsisted, but 
changed and somehow inverted its meaning. It was no longer a 
matter of requiring human reason to abandon its pride and its 
certainties in order to lose itself in the great unreason of sacrifice. 
When classical Christianity speaks of the madness of the Cross, 
it is merely to humiliate false reason and add luster to the eternal 
light of truth; the madness of God-in-man’s-image is simply a 
wisdom not recognized by the men of unreason who live in this 
world: “Jesus crucified ... was the scandal of the world and 
appeared as nothing but ignorance and madness to the eyes of 
his time.” But the fact that the world has become Christian, and 
that the order of God is revealed through the meanderings of 
history and the madness of men, now suffices to show that 
“Christ has become the highest point of our wisdom.”9 The 
scandal of Christian faith and Christian abasement, whose 
strength and value as revelation Pascal still preserved, would soon 
have no more meaning for Christian thought except perhaps to 
reveal in these scandalized consciences so many blind souls: “Do 
not permit your Cross, which has subdued the universe for you, 
to be still the madness and scandal of proud minds.” Christian 
unreason was relegated by Christians themselves into the 
margins of a reason that had become identical with the wisdom 
of God incarnate. After Port-Royal, men would have to wait two 
centuries—until Dostoievsky and Nietzsche—for Christ to 
regain the glory of his madness, for scandal to recover its power 
as revelation, for unreason to cease being merely the public 
shame of reason. 

But at the very moment Christian reason rid itself of the 
madness that had so long been a part of itself, the madman, in 
his abolished reason, in the fury of his animality, received a 
singular power as a demonstration: it was as if scandal, driven out 
of that superhuman region where it related to God and where 
the Incarnation was manifested, reappeared, in the plenitude of 


90 


its force and pregnant with a new lesson, in that region where 
man has a relation to nature and to his animality. The lesson’s 
point of application has shifted to the lower regions of madness. 
The Cross is no longer to be considered in its scandal; but it 
must not be forgotten that throughout his human life Christ 
honored madness, sanctified it as he sanctified infirmity cured, 
sin forgiven, poverty assured of eternal riches. Saint Vincent de 
Paul reminds those assigned to tend the mad within the houses 
of confinement that their “rule in this is Our Lord who chose to 
be surrounded by lunatics, demoniacs, madmen, the tempted and 
the possessed.” These men ruled by the powers of the inhuman 
constitute, around those who represent eternal Wisdom, around 
the Man who incarnates it, a perpetual occasion for glorification: 
because they glorify, by surrounding it, the wisdom that has been 
denied them, and at the same time give it a pretext to humiliate 
itself, to acknowledge that it is granted only by grace. Further: 
Christ did not merely choose to be surrounded by lunatics; he 
himself chose to pass in their eyes for a madman, thus 
experiencing, in his incarnation, all the sufferings of human 
misfortune. Madness thus became the ultimate form, the final 
degree of God in man’s image, before the fulfillment and 
deliverance of the Cross: “O my Savior, you were pleased to be a 
scandal to the Jews, and a madness to the Gentiles; you were 
pleased to seem out of your senses, as it is reported in the Holy 
Gospel that it was thought of Our Lord that he had gone mad. 
Dicebant quoniam in furorem versus est. His Apostles sometimes 
looked upon him as a man in anger, and he seemed such to 
them, so that they should bear witness that he had borne with all 
our infirmities and all our states of affliction, and to teach them 
and us as well to have compassion upon those who fall into these 
infirmities.” 10 Coming into this world, Christ agreed to take 
upon himself all the signs of the human condition and the very 
stigmata of fallen nature; from poverty to death, he followed the 

