who sought, from the start, to avoid it, a city where right reigns 
only by virtue of a force without appeal—a sort of sovereignty of 
good, in which intimidation alone prevails and the only 
recompense of virtue (to this degree its own reward) is to escape 
punishment. In the shadows of the bourgeois city is born this 


71 



strange republic of the good which is imposed by force on all 
those suspected of belonging to evil. This is the underside of the 
bourgeoisie’s great dream and great preoccupation in the classical 
age: the laws of the State and the laws of the heart at last 
identical. “Let our politicians leave off their calculations ... let 
them learn once and for all that everything can be had for 
money, except morals and citizens.”9 

Is this not the dream that seems to have haunted the founders 
of the house of confinement in Hamburg? One of the directors is 
to see that “all in the house are properly instructed as to religious 
and moral duties.... The schoolmaster must instruct the children 
in religion, and encourage them, at proper times, to learn and 
repeat portions of Scripture. He must also teach them reading, 
writing and accounts, and a decent behaviour to those that visit 
the house. He must take care that they attend divine service, and 

are orderly at it.” In England, the workhouse regulations 
devote much space to the surveillance of morals and to religious 
education. Thus for the house in Plymouth, a schoolmaster is to 
be appointed who will fulfill the triple requirement of being 
“pious, sober, and discreet.” Every morning and evening, at the 
prescribed hour, it will be his task to preside at prayers; every 
Saturday afternoon and on holidays, he will address the inmates, 
exhorting and instructing them in “the fundamental parts of the 
Protestant religion, according to the doctrine of the Church of 
England.” Hamburg or Plymouth, Zuchthausern and workhouses 
—throughout Protestant Europe, fortresses of moral order were 
constructed, in which were taught religion and whatever was 
necessary to the peace of the State. 

In Catholic countries, the goal is the same but the religious 
imprint is a little more marked, as the work of Saint Vincent de 
Paul bears witness. “The principal end for which such persons 
have been removed here, out of the storms of the great world, 
and introduced into this solitude as pensioners, is entirely to 


72 
