still-ductile substance of the brain. But in its turn, this organic 
figure is merely the other side of a preoccupation which has 
obsessed the patient’s mind; it represents what might be called 
the sedimentation in the body of an infinitely repeated discourse 
apropos of the punishment God must reserve for sinners guilty of 
homicide. The body and the traces it conceals, the soul and the 
images it perceives, are here no more than stages in the syntax of 
delirious language. 


107 


And lest we be criticized for elaborating this entire analysis 
around a single observation from a single author (a privileged 
observation, since it concerns melancholic delirium), we shall 
also seek confirmation of the fundamental role of delirious 
discourse in the classical conception of madness in another 
author, of another period, and apropos of a very different disease. 
This is a case of “nymphomania” observed by Bienville. The 
imagination of a young girl, “Julie,” had been inflamed by 
precocious reading and aroused by the remarks of a servant girl 
“initiated into the secrets of Venus,... a virtuous handmaiden in 
the mother’s eyes” but “a dear and voluptuous stewardess of the 
daughter’s pleasures.” Yet Julie combats these—to her—new 
desires with all the impressions she has received in the course of 
her education; to the seductive language of novels, she opposes 
the lessons of religion and virtue; and despite the vivacity of her 
imagination, she does not succumb to disease so long as she 
possesses “the strength to reason thus with herself: it is neither 
lawful nor virtuous to obey so shameful a passion.’Td But the 
wicked remarks, the dangerous readings increase; at every 
moment, they render more intense the agitation of the 
weakening fibers; then the fundamental language by which she 
had hitherto resisted gradually gives way: “Nature alone had 
spoken hitherto; but soon illusion, chimera, and extravagance 
played their part; at length she acquired the unhappy strength to 
approve in herself this horrible maxim: nothing is so beautiful 
nor so sweet as to obey the desires of love.” This fundamental 
discourse opens the gates of madness: the imagination is freed, 
the appetites continually increase, the fibers reach the final 
degree of irritation. Delirium, in its lapidary form of a moral 
principle, leads straight to the convulsions which can endanger 
life itself. 

At the end of this last cycle which had begun with the liberty 
of the hallucination and which closes now with the rigor of 


108 


delirious language, we can conclude: 

1. In madness , for the classical age> there exist two forms oj 
delirium. A special, symptomatic form, proper to some of the 
diseases of the mind and especially to melancholia; in this sense 
we can say that there are diseases with or without delirium. In 
any case, such delirium is always manifest; it forms an integral 
part of the signs of madness; it is immanent to madness’s truth 
and constitutes only a sector of it. But there exists another 
delirium which is not always manifest, which is not formulated 
by the sufferer himself in the course of the disease, but which 
cannot fail to exist in the eyes of anyone who, seeking to trace 
the disease from its origins, attempts to formulate its riddle and 
its truth. 

2. This implicit delirium exists in all the alterations of the mind , 
even where we would expect it least. In cases of no more than 
silent gestures, wordless violence, oddities of conduct, classical 
thought has no doubt that madness is continually subjacent, 
relating each of these particular signs to the general essence of 
madness. James’s Dictionary expressly urges us to consider as 
delirious “the sufferers who sin by fault or excess in any of 
various voluntary actions, in a manner contrary to reason and to 
propriety; as when they use their hand, for example, to tear out 
tufts of wool or in an action similar to that which serves to catch 
flies; or when a patient acts against his custom and without 
cause, or when he speaks too much or too little against his 
normal habits; if he abounds in obscene remarks, being, when in 
health, of measured speech and decent in his discourse, and if he 
utters words that have no consequence, if he breathes more 
faintly than he must, or uncovers his private parts in the presence 
of those who are near him. We also regard as being in a state of 
delirium those whose minds are affected by some derangement 
in the organs of sense, or who use them in a fashion not 
customary to them, as when, for example, a sufferer is deprived 


109 



of some voluntary action or acts inhabitually.”14 

3. Thus understood , discourse covers the entire range of madness. 
Madness, in the classical sense, does not designate so much a 
specific change in the mind or in the body, as the existence, 
under the body’s alterations, under the oddity of conduct and 
conversation, of a delirious discourse. The simplest and most 
