acknowledged that the succession of mania and melancholia is a 
phenomenon either of metamorphosis or of remote causality. For 
Joseph Lieutaud, a melancholia that lasts a long time and whose 
delirium is exacerbated loses its traditional symptoms and 
assumes a strange resemblance to mania: “the last stage of 
melancholia has many affinities with mania.” But the status of 
this analogy is not elaborated. For Dufour, the link is even 
looser: it is a remote causal connection, melancholia being able to 
provoke mania, as well as “worms in the frontal sinuses, or 
dilated or varicose vessels.” Without the support of an image, no 
observation succeeded in transforming the evidence of succession 
into a symptomatic structure that was both precise and essential. 

Of course the image of flame and smoke disappeared in 
Willis’s successors; but it was still by images that the work of 
organization was accomplished—images increasingly functional, 
more firmly fixed in the great physiological themes of circulation 


143 



and heating, increasingly remote from the cosmic figures Willis 
had borrowed them from. For Boerhaave and his commentator 
Gerard van Swieten, mania formed quite naturally the highest 
degree of melancholia—not only following a frequent 
metamorphosis, but as the result of a necessary dynamic 
sequence: the cerebral liquid, which stagnates in the melancholic, 
becomes agitated after a certain time, for the black bile that fills 
the viscera becomes by its very immobility “bitterer and more 
malignant”; there then form in it more acid and subtler elements 
which, carried to the brain by the blood, provoke the maniac’s 
great agitation. Mania is thus distinguished from melancholia 
only by a difference of degree: it is its natural consequence, it 
results from the same causes, and is ordinarily treated by the 
same remedies. For Friedrich Hoffmann, the unity of mania and 
melancholia is a natural effect of the laws of movement and 
shock; but what is pure mechanics on the level of principles 
becomes dialectics in the development of life and of disease. 
Melancholia, in effect, is characterized by immobility; in other 
words, the thickened blood congests the brain where it 
accumulates; where it ought to circulate, it tends to stop, 
immobilized by its heaviness. But if this heaviness retards 
movement, it also makes the shock more violent at the moment 
it occurs; the brain, the vessels by which it is traversed, its very 
substance, more violently jarred, tend to resist more, therefore to 
harden, and by this hardening the thickened blood is sent back 
more energetically; its movement increases and it is soon caught 
up in that agitation which is mania. We have thus passed quite 
naturally from the image of an immobile congestion to images of 
dryness, of hardness, of rapid movement, and this by a sequence 
in which the principles of classical mechanics are at every 
moment influenced, deflected, distorted by a fidelity to 
iconographic themes which are the true organizers of this 
functional unity. 

Subsequently other images will be added, but will no longer 


144 



play a constitutive role; they will function only as so many 
interpretive variations upon the theme of a previously acquired 
unity. Witness for example the explanation Spengler proposed 
for the alternation between mania and melancholia, borrowing 
its principle from the electric battery. First there is a 
concentration of nervous power and of its fluid in a certain 
region of the system; only this sector is agitated, all the rest is in 
a state of sleep: this is the melancholic phase. But when it 
reaches a certain degree of intensity, this local charge suddenly 
expands into the entire system, which it agitates violently for a 
certain time, until its discharge is complete: this is the manic 
episode. At this level of elaboration, the image is too complex 
and too complete, it is borrowed from a model too remote to 
have an organizing role in the perception of a pathological unity. 
It is, on the contrary, suggested by that perception, which itself is 
based on unifying, though much more elementary, images. 

It is these images which are secretly present in the text of 
James’s Dictionary , one of the first in which the manic-depressive 
cycle is given as an observed phenomenon, as a unity easily 
perceived by an unprejudiced scrutiny. “It is absolutely necessary 
to reduce melancholia and mania to a single species of disease, 
and consequently to consider them in one and the same glance, 
for we find from our experiments and our day-to-day 
observations that one and the other have the same origin and the 
same cause.... The most exact observations and our daily 
experience confirm the fact, for we see that melancholics, 
especially those in whom the disposition is inveterate, easily 
become maniacal, and when the mania ceases, the melancholia 
begins again, in such a way that there is a passage and return 
from one to the other after certain periods of time.’Tl What was 
constituted, in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, under 
the influence of images, was therefore a perceptual structure, and 
not a conceptual system or even a group of symptoms. The proof 


