

244 


moment could come when “the ever multiplying foundations 
would ultimately absorb all funds and all private property.” Upon 
close scrutiny, the classical forms of aid were a cause of 
impoverishment, the gradual immobilization and in a sense the 
slow death of all productive wealth: “If all the men who ever 
lived had had a tomb, it would have been quite necessary, in 
order to find land to cultivate, to overturn these sterile 
monuments, and to stir the ashes of the dead in order to feed the 

living. ”10 

What disappeared, in the course of the eighteenth century, 
was not the inhuman rigor with which madmen were treated, but 
the evident necessity of confinement, the total unity in which 
they were situated without difficulty, and those countless threads 
that wove them into the continuous texture of unreason. 
Madness was set free long before Pinel, not from the material 
constraints which kept it in the dungeon, but from a much more 
binding, perhaps more decisive servitude which kept it under the 
domination of unreasons obscure power. Even before the 
Revolution, madness was free: free for a perception which 
individualized it, free for the recognition of its unique features 
and for all the operations that would finally give it its status as an 
object. 

Left alone, and detached from its former relations, within the 
crumbling walls of confinement, madness was a problem— 
raising questions it had hitherto never formulated. 

Above all, it embarrassed the legislator who, unable to keep 
from sanctioning the end of confinement, no longer knew at 
what point in the social sphere to situate it-prison, hospital, or 
family aid. The measures taken immediately before or after the 
beginning of the Revolution reflect this indecision. 

In his circular on the lettres de cachet , Breteuil asked the 
administrators to indicate the nature of the detention orders in 
the various houses of confinement, and what reasons justified 


245 


them. After a year or two of detention at the most, those men 
were to be set free “who, having done nothing that could expose 
them to the severity of the punishments pronounced by the laws, 
had abandoned themselves to the excesses of libertinage, 
debauchery, and dissipation.” On the other hand, those prisoners 
were to be kept in the houses of confinement “whose minds are 
deranged and whose imbecility makes them incapable of 
conducting themselves in a world where their rages would make 
them dangerous. With respect to these, all that is necessary is to 
ascertain whether their condition is still the same, and 
unfortunately it becomes indispensable to continue their 
detention as long as it is acknowledged that their freedom is 
harmful to society, or a useless benefit to themselves.” This was 
the first stage: to reduce as much as possible the practice of 
confinement with regard to moral transgressions, family 
conflicts, the most benign aspects of libertinage, yet to leave it 
untouched in its principle, and with one of its major meanings 
intact: the internment of the mad. This is the moment when 
madness actually takes possession of confinement, while 
confinement itself is divested of its other forms of utility. 

The second stage was that of the great investigations 
prescribed by the National Assembly and by the Constituent 
Assembly, immediately following the Declaration of the Rights 
of Man: “No man may be arrested or detained except in the cases 
determined by law and according to the forms therein prescribed. 
... The law must permit only the penalties strictly and evidently 
necessary, and no one may be punished under a law established 
and promulgated subsequent to the crime.” The era of 
confinement was over. There remained only an imprisonment 
shared for the moment by condemned or presumed criminals 
and the mad. The Committee on Mendicity of the Constitutent 
Assembly designated five persons to visit the houses of 
confinement in Paris. The Duke de la Rochefoucauld-Liancourt 
presented the report (December 1789); he declared that the 


246 



presence of madmen gave the houses of correction a degrading 
aspect and was likely to reduce the inmates to a status unworthy 
of humanity; the melange tolerated there proved a great frivolity 
on the part of the authorities and the magistrates: ‘‘This 
carelessness is far from the enlightened and scrupulous pity for 
misfortune whereby it receives all possible alleviation and 
consolation in seeking to succor poverty, can one ever 
consent to appear to degrade humanity?” 

If the mad defile those with whom they have been 
imprudently confined, a special internment must be reserved for 
