around these two fundamental themes: the subject must be 
restored to his initial purity, and must be wrested from his pure 
subjectivity in order to be initiated into the world; the non-being 
that alienates him from himself must be annihilated, and he 
must be restored to the plenitude of the exterior world, to the 
solid truth of being. 

The techniques were to subsist longer than their meaning. 
When, outside the experience of unreason, madness had received 
a purely psychological and moral status, when the relations of 
error and fault by which classicism defined madness were 
crammed into the single notion of guilt, the techniques still 
remained, but with a much more restricted significance; all that 
was sought was a mechanical effect, or a moral punishment. It 
was in this manner that the methods of regulating movement 
degenerated into the famous “rotatory machine” whose 
mechanism and efficacity were demonstrated by Mason Cox at 
the beginning of the nineteenth century: 10 a perpendicular pillar 
is attached to both floor and ceiling; the sufferer is attached to a 
chair or a bed hung from a horizontal arm moving around the 
pillar; by means of a “not very complicated system of gears” the 
machine is set for “the degree of speed desired.” Cox cites one of 
his own observations; it concerns a man whom melancholia had 
thrown into a kind of stupor: “His complexion was dark and 
leaden, his eyes yellow, his looks constantly fixed upon the 
ground, his limbs motionless, his tongue dry and paralyzed, and 


187 


his pulse slow.” This sufferer was placed upon the rotatory 
machine, which was set at an increasingly rapid movement. The 
effect surpassed expectation; the sufferer became excessively 
disturbed: melancholic rigidity gave way to manic agitation. But 
this first effect passed, and the invalid relapsed into his initial 
state. The rhythm was then changed; the machine was made to 
turn very rapidly, but it was stopped at regular intervals, and in a 
very abrupt manner. The melancholia was driven out, without 
the rotation having had time to release the manic agitation. This 
“centrifugation” of melancholia is very characteristic of the new 
use of the old therapeutic themes. Movement no longer aimed at 
restoring the invalid to the truth of the exterior world, but only 
at producing a series of internal effects, purely mechanical and 
purely psychological. It was no longer the presence of the truth 
that determined the cure, but a functional norm. In this 
reinterpretation of the old method, the organism was no longer 
related to anything but itself and its own nature, while in the 
initial version, what was to be restored was its relation with the 
world, its essential link with being and with truth: if we add that 
the rotatory machine was soon used as a threat and a 
punishment, we see the impoverishment of the meanings which 
had richly sustained the therapeutic methods throughout the 
entire classical period. Medicine was now content to regulate and 
to punish, with means which had once served to exorcise sin, to 
dissipate error in the restoration of madness to the world’s 
obvious truth. 

In 1771, Bienville wrote apropos of Nymphomania that there 
were times when it could be cured “merely by treating the 
imagination; but there were none or almost none when physical 
remedies alone could effect a radical cure.” And a little later, 
Beauchesne: “One would undertake in vain to cure a man 
suffering from madness, if one tried to succeed by physical means 
alone.... Material remedies can never enjoy a complete success 


188 



without that succor which a strong and healthy mind affords a 
weak and sick one.” 

Such texts do not discover the necessity of a psychological 
treatment; rather they mark the end of an era: the era when the 
difference between physical medicaments and moral treatments 
was not yet accepted as obvious by medical thought. The unity of 
the symbols begins to break down, and the techniques lose their 
total significance. They are no longer credited with more than a 
local efficacity—on the body or on the soul. The cure again 
changes direction; it is no longer determined by the meaningful 
unity of the disease, organized around its major qualities; but, 
segment by segment, must address itself to the various elements 
that compose the disease; the cure will consist of a series of 
partial destructions, in which psychological attack and physical 
intervention are juxtaposed, complement each other, but never 
interpenetrate. 

In fact, what to us seems already the outline of a psychological 
cure was no such thing to the classical physicians who applied it. 
Since the Renaissance, music had regained all those therapeutic 
virtues antiquity had attributed to it. Its effects were especially 
remarkable upon madness. Johann Schenck cured a man “fallen 
into a profound melancholia” by having him attend “concerts of 
musical instruments that particularly pleased him”; Wilhelm 
Albrecht also cured a delirious patient, after having tried all other 
remedies in vain, by prescribing the performance, during one of 
his attacks, of “a little song which awakened the sufferer, pleased 
him, excited him to laugh, and dispelled the paroxysm forever.” 
