secret of unreason s nothingness. 

Within the chateau where Sade’s hero confines himself, 
within the convents, the forests, the dungeons where he endlessly 
pursues the agony of his victims, it seems at first glance that 
nature can act with utter freedom. There man rediscovers a truth 
he had forgotten, though it was manifest: what desire can be 
contrary to nature, since it was given to man by nature itself? 
And since it was taught by nature in the great lesson of life and 


293 



death which never stops repeating itself in the world? The 
madness of desire, insane murders, the most unreasonable 
passions—all are wisdom and reason, since they are a part of the 
order of nature. Everything that morality and religion, 
everything that a clumsy society has stifled in man, revives in the 
castle of murders. There man is finally attuned to his own 
nature; or rather, by an ethic peculiar to this strange 
confinement, man must scrupulously maintain, without 
deviation, his fidelity to nature: a strict task, a total enterprise: 
“You will know nothing unless you have known everything; if 
you are timid enough to stop with Nature, she will escape you 
forever.”! Conversely, if man has wounded or changed nature, it 
is man’s task to repair the damage through the mathematics of a 
sovereign vengeance: “Nature caused us all to be born equal; if 
fate is pleased to disturb this plan of the general law, it is our 
responsibility to correct its caprice, and to repair by our attention 
the usurpations of the stronger.”^ The slowness of revenge, like 
the insolence of desire, belongs to nature. There is nothing that 
the madness of men invents which is not either nature made 
manifest or nature restored. 

But this is only the first phase of Sade’s thought: the ironic 
justification, both rational and lyrical, the gigantic pastiche, of 
Rousseau. Beyond this demonstration-by-absurdity of the 
inanity of contemporary philosophy, beyond all its verbiage 
about man and nature, the real decisions are still to be made: 
decisions that are also breaks, in which the links between man 
and his natural being disappear. 3 The famous Society of the 
Friends of Crime, the project of a Swedish Constitution, once 
we remove their stinging references to the Social Contract and to 
the proposed constitutions for Poland or Corsica, establish 
nothing but the sovereign rigor of subjectivity in the rejection of 
all natural liberty and all natural equality: uncontrolled disposal 
of one member by the other, the unconditional exercise of 

