
no doubt, they could never descend.’’^ Here is madness elevated 
to spectacle above the silence of the asylums, and becoming a 
public scandal for the general delight. Unreason was hidden in 
the silence of the houses of confinement, but madness continued 
to be present on the stage of the world—with more commotion 


80 


than ever. It would soon reach, under the Empire, a point that 
had never been attained in the Middle Ages and the 
Renaissance; the strange Brotherhood of the Blue Ship had once 
given performances in which madness was mimed; now it was 
madness itself, madness in flesh and blood, which put on the 
show. Early in the nineteenth century, Coulmier, the director of 
Charenton, had organized those famous performances in which 
madmen sometimes played the roles of actors, sometimes those 
of watched spectators. “The insane who attended these 
theatricals were the object of the attention and curiosity of a 
frivolous, irresponsible, and often vicious public. The bizarre 
attitudes of these unfortunates and their condition provoked the 
mocking laughter and the insulting pity of the spectators.”7 
Madness became pure spectacle, in a world over which Sade 
extended his sovereignty and which was offered as a diversion to 
the good conscience of a reason sure of itself. Until the 
beginning of the nineteenth century, and to the indignation of 
Royer-Collard, madmen remained monsters—that is, 
etymologically, beings or things to be shown. 

Confinement hid away unreason, and betrayed the shame it 
aroused; but it explicitly drew attention to madness, pointed to 
it. If, in the case of unreason, the chief intention was to avoid 
scandal, in the case of madness that intention was to organize it. 
A strange contradiction: the classical age enveloped madness in a 
total experience of unreason; it reabsorbed its particular forms, 
which the Middle Ages and the Renaissance had clearly 
individualized into a general apprehension in which madness 
consorted indiscriminately with all the forms of unreason. But at 
the same time it assigned to this same madness a special sign: not 
that of sickness, but that of glorified scandal. Yet there is 
nothing in common between this organized exhibition of 
madness in the eighteenth century and the freedom with which 
it came to light during the Renaissance. In the Renaissance, 


81 


