more must be attempted than to forestall corruptions; they must 
be destroyed. Whence the therapeutics that attack deterioration 
itself, and seek either to deflect the corrupt substances or to 
dissolve the corrupting ones: techniques of deflection and 
techniques of detersion. 

To the first belong all the strictly physical methods that seek 
to create wounds or sores on the surface of the body, both centers 
of infection that relieve the organism, and centers of evacuation 
into the outside world. Thus Fallowes explains the beneficial 
mechanism of his oleum cephalicum ; in madness, “black vapors 
clog the very fine vessels through which the animal spirits must 
pass”; the blood is thus deprived of direction; it encumbers the 
veins of the brain where it stagnates, unless it is agitated by a 
confused movement “that distracts the ideas.” Oleum cephalicum 
has the advantage of provoking “little pustules on the head”; they 
are anointed with oil to keep them from drying out and so that 
“the black vapors lodged in the brain” may continue to escape. 
But burning and cauterizing the body at any point produces the 
same effect. It was even supposed that diseases of the skin such 
as scabies, eczema, or smallpox could put an end to a fit of 
madness; the corruption then left the viscera and the brain, to 
spread on the surface of the body, where it was released 
externally. By the end of the century, it became customary to 
inoculate scabies in the most resistant cases of mania. In his 
Instructions of 1785, addressed to the directors of hospitals, 
Francois Doublet recommends that if bleedings, purges, baths, 
and showers do not cure mania, the use of “cauters, setons, 
superficial abscesses, inoculation of scabies” will. 

But the principal task is to dissolve the fermentations which, 
having formed in the body, give rise to madness. To accomplish 
this, the chief agent is bitters. Bitterness has all the harsh virtues 
of sea water; it purifies by wearing away, it works its corrosion on 
everything useless, unhealthy, and impure that the disease may 
have deposited in the body and the soul. Bitter and active, coffee 


175 



is useful for “fat persons whose thickened humors circulate with 
difficulty”; it dries without burning—for it is the property of 
such substances to dissipate superfluous humidity without 
dangerous heat; there is in coffee, as it were, fire without flame, a 
purifying power that does not calcine; coffee reduces impurities: 
“those who take it feel by long experience that it restores the 
stomach, consumes its superfluous humidity, dissipates wind, 
dissolves the phlegm of the bowels, where it performs a mild 
abstersion, and what is most considerable, prevents the fumes 
from rising to the head and consequently reduces the aches and 
pains customarily suffered there; finally, it affords strength, vigor, 
and cleanliness to the animal spirits, without leaving any great 
impression of heat, even upon the most inured persons who are 

accustomed to use it.” Bitter, but tonic also, is the quinine 
Whytt freely prescribes to persons “whose nervous system is very 
delicate”; it is efficacious against “weakness, discouragement, and 
depression”; two years of a cure consisting only of a tincture of 
quinine, “occasionally discontinued for a month at most,” were 
sufficient to cure a woman suffering from a nervous complaint. 
For delicate persons, quinine must be associated with “a 
bitterness pleasant to the taste”; but if the organism is able to 
withstand stronger attacks, vitriol, mixed with quinine, cannot be 
too strongly recommended. Twenty or thirty drops of elixir of 
vitriol are sovereign. 

Quite naturally, soaps and soap products inevitably enjoy 
privileged effects in this purificatory enterprise. “Soap dissolves 
almost anything that is concrete.”4 Tissot believes that soap can 
be consumed directly, and that it will calm many nervous 
ailments; but more often it is sufficient to consume, first thing in 
the morning, by themselves or with bread, “soapy fruits”—that 
is, cherries, strawberries, currants, figs, oranges, grapes, ripe 
pears, and “other fruits of this nature.” But there are cases where 
the difficulty is so serious, the obstruction so irreducible, that no 


176 


soap can conquer it. Soluble tartar is then recommended. 
Muzzell was the first to have the idea of prescribing tartar for 
“madness and melancholia/’ and published several triumphant 
observations on the subject. Whytt confirms them, and shows at 
the same time that tartar functions as a detersive, since it is 
especially efficacious against obstructive illnesses: “Insofar as I 
have observed it, soluble tartar is more useful in maniac or 
melancholic affections produced by harmful humors amassed in 
the primary canals, than for those produced by a flaw in the 
brain.” Among the dissolvants, Raulin also cites honey, chimney 
soot, Oriental saffron, wood lice, powdered lobster claw, and 
bezoar. 

Halfway between these internal methods of dissolution and 
the external techniques of deflection, we find a series of practices 
of which the most frequent are applications of vinegar. As an 
acid, vinegar dissolves obstructions, destroys foreign bodies as 
they are fermenting. But in external application, it can serve as a 
