girl she would henceforth be treated with all the severity she 
deserved, for she herself was opposed to her cure and 
dissimulated with insurmountable obstinacy the basic cause of 
her illness.” Through this new rigor and these threats, the sick 
girl felt “profoundly moved ... she ended by acknowledging her 
wrongs and making a frank confession that she had suffered a 
loss of reason as the result of a forbidden romantic attachment, 
naming the person who had been its object.” After this first 
confession, the cure became easy: “a most favorable alteration 
occurred ... she was henceforth soothed and could not 
sufficiently express her gratitude toward the keeper who had 
brought an end to her continual agitation, and had restored 
tranquillity and calm to her heart.” There is not a moment of the 
story that could not be transcribed in psychoanalytical terms. To 
such a degree was it true that the medical personage, according 
to Pinel, had to act not as the result of an objective definition of 
the disease or a specific classifying diagnosis, but by relying upon 


283 



that prestige which envelops the secrets of the Family, of 
Authority, of Punishment, and of Love; it is by bringing such 
powers into play, by wearing the mask of Father and of Judge, 
that the physician, by one of those abrupt short cuts that leave 
aside mere medical competence, became the almost magic 
perpetrator of the cure, and assumed the aspect of a 
Thaumaturge; it was enough that he observed and spoke, to 
cause secret faults to appear, insane presumptions to vanish, and 
madness at last to yield to reason. His presence and his words 
were gifted with that power of disalienation, which at one blow 
revealed the transgression and restored the order of morality. 

It is a curious paradox to see medical practice enter the 
uncertain domain of the quasi-miraculous at the very moment 
when the knowledge of mental illness tries to assume a positive 
meaning. On the one hand, madness puts itself at a distance in 
an objective field where the threats of unreason disappear; but at 
this same moment, the madman tends to form with the doctor, 
in an unbroken unity, a “couple” whose complicity dates back to 
very old links. Life in the asylum as Tuke and Pinel constituted it 
permitted the birth of that delicate structure which would 
become the essential nucleus of madness—a structure that 
formed a kind of microcosm in which were symbolized the 
massive structures of bourgeois society and its values: Family- 
Child relations, centered on the theme of paternal authority; 
Transgression-Punishment relations, centered on the theme of 
immediate justice; Madness-Disorder relations, centered on the 
theme of social and moral order. It is from these that the 
physician derives his power to cure; and it is to the degree that 
the patient finds himself, by so many old links, already alienated 
in the doctor, within the doctor-patient couple, that the doctor 
has the almost miraculous power to cure him. 

In the time of Pinel and Tuke, this power had nothing 
extraordinary about it; it was explained and demonstrated in the 
efficacity, simply, of moral behavior; it was no more mysterious 


284 



than the power of the eighteenth-century doctor when he diluted 
fluids or relaxed fibers. But very soon the meaning of this moral 
practice escaped the physician, to the very extent that he 
enclosed his knowledge in the norms of positivism: from the 
beginning of the nineteenth century, the psychiatrist no longer 
quite knew what was the nature of the power he had inherited 
from the great reformers, and whose efficacity seemed so foreign 
to his idea of mental illness and to the practice of all other 
doctors. 

This psychiatric practice, mysterious even to those who used 
it, is very important in the situation of the madman within the 
medical world. First because medicine of the mind for the first 
time in the history of Western science was to assume almost 
complete autonomy: from the time of the Greeks, it had been no 
more than a chapter of medicine, and we have seen Willis study 
madness under the rubric “diseases of the head”; after Pinel and 
Tuke, psychiatry would become a medicine of a particular style: 
those most eager to discover the origin of madness in organic 
causes or in hereditary dispositions would not be able to avoid 
this style. They would be all the more unable to avoid it in that 
this particular style—bringing into play increasingly obscure 
moral powers—would originally be a sort of bad conscience; they 
would increasingly confine themselves in positivism, the more 
they felt their practice slipping out of it. 

As positivism imposes itself upon medicine and psychiatry, 
this practice becomes more and more obscure, the psychiatrist’s 
power more and more miraculous, and the doctor-patient couple 
sinks deeper into a strange world. In the patient’s eyes, the 
doctor becomes a thaumaturge; the authority he has borrowed 
from order, morality, and the family now seems to derive from 
himself; it is because he is a doctor that he is believed to possess 
these powers, and while Pinel, with Tuke, strongly asserted that 
his moral action was not necessarily linked to any scientific 
