At another hospital, in Bethnal Green, a woman subject to 
violent seizures was placed in a pigsty, feet and fists bound; when 
the crisis had passed she was tied to her bed, covered only by a 
blanket; when she was allowed to take a few steps, an iron bar 
was placed between her legs, attached by rings to her ankles and 
by a short chain to handcuffs. Samuel Tuke, in his Report on the 
Condition of the Indigent Insane , gives the details of a complicated 
system devised at Bethlehem to control a reputedly dangerous 
madman: he was attached by a long chain that ran over the wall 
and thus permitted the attendant to lead him about, to keep him 
on a leash, so to speak, from outside; around his neck had been 
placed an iron ring, which was attached by a short chain to 
another ring; this latter slid the length of a vertical iron bar 
fastened to the floor and ceiling of the cell. When reforms began 
to be instituted at Bethlehem, a man was found who had lived in 
this cell, attached in this fashion, for twelve years. 

When practices reach this degree of violent intensity, it 
becomes clear that they are no longer inspired by the desire to 
punish nor by the duty to correct. The notion of a “resipiscence” 
is entirely foreign to this regime. But there was a certain image 
of animality that haunted the hospitals of the period. Madness 
borrowed its face from the mask of the beast. Those chained to 
the cell walls were no longer men whose minds had wandered, 
but beasts preyed upon by a natural frenzy: as if madness, at its 


83 



extreme point, freed from that moral unreason in which its most 
attenuated forms are enclosed, managed to rejoin, by a paroxysm 
of strength, the immediate violence of animality. This model of 
animality prevailed in the asylums and gave them their cagelike 
aspect, their look of the menagerie. Coguel describes La 
Salpetriere at the end of the eighteenth century: “Madwomen 
seized with fits of violence are chained like dogs at their cell 
doors, and separated from keepers and visitors alike by a long 
corridor protected by an iron grille; through this grille is passed 
their food and the straw on which they sleep; by means of rakes, 
part of the filth that surrounds them is cleaned out.” At the 
hospital of Nantes, the menagerie appears to consist of individual 
cages for wild beasts. Never had Esquirol seen “such an 
extravagance of locks, of bolts, of iron bars to shut the doors of 
the cells.... Tiny openings pierced next to the doors were fitted 
with iron bars and shutters. Quite close to this opening hung a 
chain fastened to the wall and bearing at its end a cast-iron 
receptacle, somewhat resembling a wooden shoe, in which food 
was placed and passed through the bars of these openings.” 
