attached to the figure of the leper as well as the meaning of his 
exclusion, the social importance of that insistent and fearful 
figure which was not driven off without first being inscribed 
within a sacred circle. 

If the leper was removed from the world, and from the 
community of the Church visible, his existence was yet a 
constant manifestation of God, since it was a sign both of His 
anger and of His grace: “My friend,” says the ritual of the 
Church of Vienne, “it pleaseth Our Lord that thou shouldst be 
infected with this malady, and thou hast great grace at the hands 
of Our Lord that he desireth to punish thee for thy iniquities in 
this world.” And at the very moment when the priest and his 
assistants drag him out of the church with backward step, the 
leper is assured that he still bears witness for God: “And 
howsoever thou mayest be apart from the Church and the 
company of the Sound, yet art thou not apart from the grace of 
God.” Brueghefs lepers attend at a distance, but forever, that 
climb to Calvary on which the entire people accompanies Christ. 
Hieratic witnesses of evil, they accomplish their salvation in and 
by their very exclusion: in a strange reversibility that is the 
opposite of good works and prayer, they are saved by the hand 
that is not stretched out. The sinner who abandons the leper at 
his door opens his way to heaven. “For which have patience in 
thy malady; for Our Lord hateth thee not because of it, keepeth 
thee not from his company; but if thou hast patience thou wilt be 
saved, as was the leper who died before the gate of the rich man 
and was carried straight to paradise.” Abandonment is his 
salvation; his exclusion offers him another form of communion. 

Leprosy disappeared, the leper vanished, or almost, from 
memory; these structures remained. Often, in these same places, 
the formulas of exclusion would be repeated, strangely similar 
two or three centuries later. Poor vagabonds, criminals, and 


18 



“deranged minds” would take the part played by the leper, and 
we shall see what salvation was expected from this exclusion, for 
them and for those who excluded them as well. With an 
altogether new meaning and in a very different culture, the forms 
would remain—essentially that major form of a rigorous division 
which is social exclusion but spiritual reintegration. 

Something new appears in the imaginary landscape of the 
Renaissance; soon it will occupy a privileged place there: the 
Ship of Fools, a strange “drunken boat” that glides along the 
calm rivers of the Rhineland and the Flemish canals. 

The Narrenschiff, of course, is a literary composition, probably 
borrowed from the old Argonaut cycle, one of the great mythic 
themes recently revived and rejuvenated, acquiring an 
institutional aspect in the Burgundy Estates. Fashion favored the 
composition of these Ships, whose crew of imaginary heroes, 
ethical models, or social types embarked on a great symbolic 
voyage which would bring them, if not fortune, then at least the 
figure of their destiny or their truth. Thus Symphorien 
Champier composes a Ship of Princes and Battles of Nobility in 
1502, then a Ship of Virtuous Ladies in 1503; there is also a Ship of 
Health , alongside the Blauwe Schute of Jacob van Oestvoren in 
1413, Sebastian Brant’s Narrenschiff (1494), and the work of 
Josse Bade: Stultiferae naviculae scaphae fatuarum mulierum 
(1498). Bosch’s painting, of course, belongs to this dream fleet. 

But of all these romantic or satiric vessels, the Narrenschiff is 
the only one that had a real existence—for they did exist, these 
boats that conveyed their insane cargo from town to town. 
Madmen then led an easy wandering existence. The towns drove 
them outside their limits; they were allowed to wander in the 
open countryside, when not entrusted to a group of merchants 
and pilgrims. The custom was especially frequent in Germany; in 
Nuremberg, in the first half of the fifteenth century, the presence 
of 63 madmen had been registered; 31 were driven away; in the 


19 



fifty years that followed, there are records of 21 more obligatory 
departures; and these are only the madmen arrested by the 
municipal authorities. Frequently they were handed over to 
boatmen: in Frankfort, in 1399, seamen were instructed to rid 
the city of a madman who walked about the streets naked; in the 
first years of the fifteenth century, a criminal madman was 
expelled in the same manner from Mainz. Sometimes the sailors 
disembarked these bothersome passengers sooner than they had 
promised; witness a blacksmith of Frankfort twice expelled and 
twice returning before being taken to Kreuznach for good. Often 
the cities of Europe must have seen these “ships of fools” 
approaching their harbors. 

It is not easy to discover the exact meaning of this custom. 
One might suppose it was a general means of extradition by 
which municipalities sent wandering madmen out of their own 
jurisdiction; a hypothesis which will not in itself account for the 
facts, since certain madmen, even before special houses were 
