a reformatory for young criminals; and before the time of Saint 
Vincent there was only one leper left at Saint-Lazare, “Sieur 
Langlois, practitioner in the civil court.” The lazar house of 
Nancy, which was among the largest in Europe, had only four 
inmates during the regency of Marie de Medicis. According to 
Catefs Memoires, there were 29 hospitals in Toulouse at the end 
of the medieval period: seven were leprosariums; but at the 
beginning of the seventeenth century we find only three 


15 


mentioned: Saint-Cyprien, Arnaud-Bernard, and Saint-Michel. 
It was a pleasure to celebrate the disappearance of leprosy: in 
1635 the inhabitants of Reims formed a solemn procession to 
thank God for having delivered their city from this scourge. 

For a century already, royal authority had undertaken the 
control and reorganization of the immense fortune represented 
by the endowments of the lazar houses; in a decree of December 
19, 1543, Francois I had a census and inventory taken “to 
remedy the great disorder that exists at present in the lazar 
houses”; in his turn, Henri IV in an edict of 1606 prescribed a 
revision of their accounts and allotted “the sums obtained from 
this investigation to the sustenance of poor noblemen and 
crippled soldiers.” The same request for regulation is recorded on 
October 24, 1612, but the excess revenues were now to be used 
for feeding the poor. 

In fact, the question of the leprosariums was not settled in 
France before the end of the seventeenth century; and the 
problem’s economic importance provoked more than one 
conflict. Were there not still, in the year 1677, 44 lazar houses in 
the province of Dauphine alone? On February 20, 1672, Louis 
XIV assigned to the Orders of Saint-Lazare and Mont-Carmel 
the effects of all the military and hospital orders; they were 
entrusted with the administration of the lazar houses of the 
kingdom. Some twenty years later, the edict of 1672 was 
revoked, and by a series of staggered measures from March 1693 
to July 1695 the goods of the lazar houses were thenceforth 
assigned to other hospitals and welfare establishments. The few 
lepers scattered in the 1,200 still-existing houses were collected 
at Saint-Mesmin near Orleans. These decrees were first applied 
in Paris, where the Parlement transferred the revenue in question 
to the establishments of the Hopital General; this example was 
imitated by the provincial authorities; Toulouse transferred the 
effects of its lazar houses to the Hopital des Incurables (1696); 
those of Beaulieu in Normandy went to the Hotel-Dieu in Caen; 


16 



those of Voley were assigned to the Hopital de Sainte-Foy. Only 
Saint-Mesmin and the wards of Ganets, near Bordeaux, 
remained as a reminder. 

England and Scotland alone had opened 220 lazar houses for a 
million and a half inhabitants in the twelfth century. But as early 
as the fourteenth century they began to empty out; by the time 
Edward III ordered an inquiry into the hospital of Ripon—in 
1342—there were no more lepers; he assigned the institution’s 
effects to the poor. At the end of the twelfth century, 
Archbishop Puisel had founded a hospital in which by 1434 only 
two beds were reserved for lepers, should any be found. In 1348, 
the great leprosarium of Saint Albans contained only three 
patients; the hospital of Romenal in Kent was abandoned 
twenty-four years later, for lack of lepers. At Chatham, the lazar 
house of Saint Bartholomew, established in 1078, had been one 
of the most important in England; under Elizabeth, it cared for 
only two patients; it was finally closed in 1627. 

The same regression of leprosy occurred in Germany, perhaps 
a little more slowly; and the same conversion of the lazar houses, 
hastened by the Reformation, which left municipal 
administrations in charge of welfare and hospital establishments; 
this was the case in Leipzig, in Munich, in Hamburg. In 1542, 
the effects of the lazar houses of Schleswig-Holstein were 
transferred to the hospitals. In Stuttgart a magistrate’s report of 
1589 indicates that for fifty years already there had been no 
lepers in the house provided for them. At Lipplingen, the lazar 
house was soon peopled with incurables and madmen. 

A strange disappearance, which was doubtless not the long- 
sought effect of obscure medical practices, but the spontaneous 
result of segregation and also the consequence, after the 
Crusades, of the break with the Eastern sources of infection. 
Leprosy withdrew, leaving derelict these low places and these 
rites which were intended, not to suppress it, but to keep it at a 
sacred distance, to fix it in an inverse exaltation. What doubtless 


17 



remained longer than leprosy, and would persist when the lazar 
houses had been empty for years, were the values and images 
