Orestes, in his frenzy, passes through a triple circle of night: 
three concentric figurations of dazzlement. Day has just dawned 
over Pyrrhus’s palace; night is still there, edging this light with 
shadow, and peremptorily indicating its limit. On this morning 
which is a festival morning, the crime has been committed, and 
Pyrrhus has closed his eyes on the dawning day: a fragment of 
shadow cast here on the steps of the altar, on the threshold of 
brightness and of darkness. The two great cosmic themes of 
madness are thus present in various forms, as omen, decor, and 
counterpoint of Orestes’ frenzy. 1 It can then begin: in a pitiless 
clarity which denounces the murder of Pyrrhus and the treachery 
of Hermione, in that dawn where everything finally explodes in a 
truth so old and at the same time so young, a first circle of 
shadow: a dark cloud into which, all around Orestes, the world 
begins to withdraw; the truth appears in this paradoxical 
twilight, in this matinal night where the cruelty of truth will be 
transformed into the fury of hallucination: 

Mais quelle epaisse nuit , tout a coup , menvironne? 

(But what thick night suddenly surrounds me?) 

It is the empty night of error ; but against the background of 
this first obscurity, a brilliance, a false light will appear: that of 
images. The nightmare rises, not in the bright light of morning, 
but in a somber scintillation: the light of storm and of murder. 

Dieux! quels ruisseaux de sang coulent autour de moil 

(O Gods! What streams of blood flow around me!) 

And then appears the dynasty of the dream. In this night the 


122 


hallucinations are set free; the Erinnyes appear and take over. 
What makes them precarious also makes them sovereign; they 
triumph easily in the solitude where they succeed one another; 
nothing challenges them; images and language intersect, in 
apostrophes which are invocations, presences affirmed and 
repulsed, solicited and feared. But all these images converge 
toward night, toward a second night which is that of 
punishment, of eternal vengeance, of death within death. The 
Erinnyes are recalled to that darkness which is their own—their 
birthplace and their truth, i.e., their own nothingness. 

Venez-vous m’enlever dans reternelle nuitf 

(Do you come to bear me off into eternal night?) 

This is the moment when it is revealed that the images of 
madness are only dream and error, and if the sufferer who is 
blinded by them appeals to them, it is only to disappear with 
them in the annihilation to which they are fated. 

A second time, then, we pass through a circle of night. But we 
are not thereby restored to the daylight reality of the world. We 
accede, beyond what is manifested in madness, to delirium , to 
that essential and constitutive structure which had secretly 
sustained madness from the first. This delirium has a name, 
Hermione; Hermione who no longer reappears as a hallucinatory 
vision, but as the ultimate truth of madness. It is significant that 
Hermione intervenes at this very moment of the frenzy: not 
among the Eumenides, nor ahead of them—to guide them; but 
behind and separated from them by the night into which they 
have dragged Orestes and in which they themselves are now 
scattered. Hermione intervenes as a figure of delirium, as the 
truth which secretly reigned from the start, and of which the 
Eumenides were ultimately only the servants. Here we are at the 
opposite of Greek tragedy, where the Erinnyes were the final 
destiny and truth which, in the night of time, had awaited the 
hero; his passion was merely their instrument. Here the 


123 



Eumenides are merely figures in the service of delirium, the 
primary and ultimate truth, which was already appearing in 
passion, and now declares itself in its nakedness. This truth rules 
alone, thrusting images away: 

Mais non , retirez-vous, laissez faire Hermione. 

(But no, begone, let Hermione do her work.) 

Hermione, who has always been present from the beginning, 
Hermione who has always lacerated Orestes, destroying his 
reason bit by bit, Hermione for whom he has become “parricide, 
assassin , sacrilege , ” reveals herself finally as the truth and 
culmination of his madness. And delirium, in its rigor, no longer 
has anything to say except to articulate as imminent decision a 
truth long since commonplace and laughable: 

Et je luiporte enfin mon coeur a de'vorer. 

(And I bring her at last my heart to devour.) 
