delicately fantastic iconography of the fourteenth century, where 
castles are toppled like dice, where the Beast is always the 
traditional dragon held at bay by the Virgin, in short where the 
order of God and its imminent victory are always apparent, gives 


33 



way to a vision of the world where all wisdom is annihilated. 
This is the great witches’ Sabbath of nature: mountains melt and 
become plains, the earth vomits up the dead and bones tumble 
out of tombs; the stars fall, the earth catches fire, all life withers 
and comes to death. The end has no value as passage and 
promise; it is the advent of a night in which the world’s old 
reason is engulfed. It is enough to look at Diirer’s Horsemen of 
the Apocalypse, sent by God Himself: these are no angels of 
triumph and reconciliation; these are no heralds of serene justice, 
but the disheveled warriors of a mad vengeance. The world sinks 
into universal Fury. Victory is neither God’s nor the Devil’s: it 
belongs to Madness. 

On all sides, madness fascinates man. The fantastic images it 
generates are not fleeting appearances that quickly disappear 
from the surface of things. By a strange paradox, what is born 
from the strangest delirium was already hidden, like a secret, like 
an inaccessible truth, in the bowels of the earth. When man 
deploys the arbitrary nature of his madness, he confronts the 
dark necessity of the world; the animal that haunts his 
nightmares and his nights of privation is his own nature, which 
will lay bare hell’s pitiless truth; the vain images of blind idiocy— 
such are the world’s Magna Sciential and already, in this disorder, 
in this mad universe, is prefigured what will be the cruelty of the 
finale. In such images—and this is doubtless what gives them 
their weight, what imposes such great coherence on their fantasy 
—the Renaissance has expressed what it apprehended of the 
threats and secrets of the world. 

During the same period, the literary, philosophical, and moral 
themes of madness are in an altogether different vein. 

The Middle Ages had given madness, or folly, a place in the 
hierarchy of vices. Beginning with the thirteenth century, it is 
customarily ranked among the wicked soldiers of the 
psychomachy. It figures, at Paris as at Amiens, among the evil 


34 

