matter, Pinel explains, “of destroying even the smallest traces of 
the extravagant ideas of the insane, which can be done only by 
obliterating, so to speak, these ideas in a state close to that of 
death.” Whence the famous techniques used in asylums like 
Charenton at the end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the 
nineteenth century: the shower proper—“the insane man, 
fastened to an armchair, was placed beneath a reservoir filled 
with cold water which poured directly upon his head through a 
large pipe”; and surprise baths—“the sufferer came down the 
corridors to the ground floor, and arrived in a square vaulted 
room, in which a pool had been constructed; he was pushed over 

backwards and into the water.”? Such violence promised the 
rebirth of a baptism. 

4. Regulation of Movement. If it is true that madness is the 


183 


irregular agitation of the spirits, the disordered movement of 
fibers and ideas, it is also obstruction of the body and the soul, 
stagnation of the humors, immobilization of the fibers in their 
rigidity, fixation of ideas and attention on a theme that gradually 
prevails over all others. It is then a matter of restoring to the 
mind and to the spirits, to the body and to the soul, the mobility 
which gives them life. This mobility, however, must be measured 
and controlled; it must not become a vain agitation of the fibers 
which no longer obey the stimuli of the exterior world. The 
animating idea of this therapeutic theme is the restitution of a 
movement that corresponds to the prudent mobility of the 
exterior world. Since madness can be dumb immobility, 
obstinate fixation as well as disorder and agitation, the cure 
consists in reviving in the sufferer a movement that will be both 
regular and real, in the sense that it will obey the rules of the 
world’s movements. 

Physicians of the period evoke the firm belief of the ancients, 
who attributed salutary effects to various forms of walking and 
running: simple walking, which both limbers and strengthens the 
body; running at an ever increasing speed, which better 
distributes the juices and humors throughout the body, at the 
same time that it diminishes the weight of the organs; running 
fully dressed, which heats and loosens the tissues, softens too 
rigid fibers. Sydenham especially recommends horseback riding 
in cases of melancholia and hypochondria: “But the best thing I 
have yet found to fortify and animate the blood and the spirits, is 
to ride almost every day, and in this manner to make rather long 
excursions in the fresh air. This exercise, by the extraordinary 
