205 



other citizens.... Healthful food, pure air, all the devices of 
liberty: such is the regimen prescribed for them, and to which 
the greatest number, by the end of a year, owe their cure.” 
Without anything in the institutions having as yet really 
changed, the meaning of exclusion and of confinement begins to 
alter: it slowly assumes positive values, and the neutral, empty, 
nocturnal space in which unreason was formerly restored to its 
nothingness begins to be peopled by a nature to which madness, 
liberated, is obliged to submit. Confinement, as the separation of 
reason from unreason, is not suppressed; but at the very heart of 
its intention, the space it occupies reveals natural powers, more 
constraining for madness, more likely to subjugate it in its 
essence, than the whole of the old limiting and repressive system. 
Madness must be liberated from that system so that, in the space 
of confinement, now endowed with a positive efficacity, it will be 
free to slough off its savage freedom, and to welcome the 
demands of nature that are for it both truth and law. Insofar as it 
is law, nature constrains the violence of desire; insofar as it is 
truth, it reduces anti-nature, and all the hallucinations of the 
imaginary. 

Here is how Pinel describes that nature, speaking of the 
hospital of Saragossa: there has been established here “a sort of 
counterpoise to the mind’s extravagances by the attraction and 
the charm inspired by the cultivation of the fields, by the natural 
instinct that leads man to sow the earth and thus to satisfy his 
needs by the fruit of his labors. From morning on, you can see 
them ... leaving gaily for the various parts of a vast enclosure that 
belongs to the hospital, sharing with a sort of emulation the tasks 
appropriate to the seasons, cultivating wheat, vegetables, 
concerned in turn with the harvest, with trellises, with the 
vintage, with olive picking, and finding in the evening, in their 
solitary asylum, calm and quiet sleep. The most constant 
experience has indicated, in this hospital, that this is the surest 


206 



and most efficacious way to restore man to reason.”22 Beneath 
the conventional images, the rigor of a meaning is easily 
perceived. The return to the immediate is effective against 
unreason only insofar as the immediate is controlled—and 
divided against itself; an immediate in which violence is isolated 
from truth, savagery separated from liberty, in which nature can 
