the unreasonable is only one of madness’s modes of appearance. 
On the contrary, unreason, for classicism, had a nominal value; it 
constituted a kind of substantial function. It was in relation to 
unreason and to it alone that madness could be understood. 
Unreason was its support; or let us say that unreason defined the 
locus of madness’s possibility. For classical man, madness was 
not the natural condition, the human and psychological root of 
unreason; it was only unreason’s empirical form; and the 
madman, tracing the course of human degradation to the 
frenzied nadir of animality, disclosed that underlying realm of 
unreason which threatens man and envelops—at a tremendous 
distance—all the forms of his natural existence. It was not a 
question of tending toward a determinism, but of being 
swallowed up by a darkness. More effectively than any other kind 
of rationalism, better in any case than our positivism, classical 
rationalism could watch out for and guard against the 
subterranean danger of unreason, that threatening space of an 
absolute freedom. 


94 



IV 



95 


PASSIONAND 

DELIRIUM 


THE savage danger of madness is related to the danger of the 
passions and to their fatal concatenation. 

Sauvages had sketched the fundamental role of passion, citing 
it as a more constant, more persistent, and somehow more 
deserved cause of madness: “The distraction of our mind is the 
result of our blind surrender to our desires, our incapacity to 
control or to moderate our passions. Whence these amorous 
frenzies, these antipathies, these depraved tastes, this melancholy 
which is caused by grief, these transports wrought in us by 
denial, these excesses in eating, in drinking, these indispositions, 
these corporeal vices which cause madness, the worst of all 
maladies.”! But as yet, what was involved was only passion’s 
moral precedence, its responsibility, in a vague way; the real 
target of this denunciation was the radical relation of the 
phenomena of madness to the very possibility of passion. 

Before Descartes, and long after his influence as philosopher 
and physiologist had diminished, passion continued to be the 
meeting ground of body and soul; the point where the latter’s 
activity makes contact with the former’s passivity, each being a 
limit imposed upon the other and the locus of their 
communication. 

The medicine of humors sees this unity primarily as a 
reciprocal interaction: “The passions necessarily cause certain 
movements in the humors; anger agitates the bile, sadness excites 
melancholy (black bile), and the movements of the humors are 
on occasion so violent that they disrupt the entire economy of 
the body, even causing death; further, the passions augment the 
quantity of the humors; anger multiplies the bile as sadness 
increases melancholy. The humors which are customarily 


96 


agitated by certain passions dispose those in whom they abound 
to the same passions, and to thinking of the objects which 
ordinarily excite them; bile disposes to anger and to thinking of 
those we hate. Melancholy (black bile) disposes to sadness and to 
thinking of untoward things; well-tempered blood disposes to 
joy. 1 

The medicine of spirits substitutes for this vague idea of 
“disposition” the rigor of a physical, mechanical transmission of 
movements. If the passions are possible only in a being which 
has a body, and a body not entirely subject to the light of its 
mind and to the immediate transparence of its will, this is true 
insofar as, in ourselves and without ourselves, and generally in 
spite of ourselves, the mind’s movements obey a mechanical 
structure which is that of the movement of spirits. “Before the 
sight of the object of passion, the animal spirits were spread 
throughout the entire body in order to preserve all the parts in 
general; but at the presence of the new object, this entire 
economy is disrupted. The majority of spirits are impelled into 
the muscles of the arms, the legs, the face, and all the exterior 
parts of the body in order to afford it a disposition proper to the 
prevailing passion and to give it the countenance and movement 
necessary for the acquisition of the good or the escape from the 
evil which presents itself.”3 Passion thus disperses the spirits, 
which are disposed to passion: that is, under the effect of passion 
and in the presence of its object, the spirits circulate, disperse, 
and concentrate according to a spatial design which licenses the 
