rapport that man maintains with himself. The mythological 
personification of madness in Erasmus is only a literary device. 
In fact, only “follies” exist—human forms of madness: “I count as 
many images as there are men”; one need only glance at states, 
even the wisest and best governed: “So many forms of madness 
abound there, and each day sees so many new ones born, that a 
thousand Democrituses would not suffice to mock them.” There 
is no madness but that which is in every man, since it is man 
who constitutes madness in the attachment he bears for himself 
and by the illusions he entertains. Philautia is the first figure 
Folly leads out in her dance, but that is because they are linked 
by a privileged relation: self-attachment is the first sign of 
madness, but it is because man is attached to himself that he 
accepts error as truth, lies as reality, violence and ugliness as 
beauty and justice. “This man, uglier than a monkey, imagines 
himself handsome as Nereus; that one thinks he is Euclid 
because he has traced three lines with a compass; that other one 
thinks he can sing like Hermogenes, whereas he is the ass before 
the lyre, and his voice sounds as false as that of the rooster 
pecking his hen.” In this delusive attachment to himself, man 
generates his madness like a mirage. The symbol of madness will 
henceforth be that mirror which, without reflecting anything 
real, will secretly offer the man who observes himself in it the 


37 



dream of his own presumption. Madness deals not so much with 
truth and the world, as with man and whatever truth about 
himself he is able to perceive. 

It thus gives access to a completely moral universe. Evil is not 
punishment or the end of time, but only fault and flaw. A 
hundred and sixteen cantos of Brant’s poem are devoted to 
portraits of the insane passengers on the Ship: there are misers, 
slanderers, drunkards; there are those who indulge in disorder 
and debauchery; those who interpret the Scriptures falsely; those 
who practice adultery. Locher, Brant’s translator, notes in his 
Latin preface the purpose and meaning of the work; it is 
concerned to teach “what evil there may be, what good; what 
vices; whither virtue, whither error may lead”; and this while 
castigating, according to the wickedness each man is guilty of, 
“the unholy, the proud, the greedy, the extravagant, the 
debauched, the voluptuous, the quick-tempered, the gluttonous, 
the voracious, the envious, the poisoners, the faith-breakers” ... 
in short, all that man has been able to invent in the way of 
irregularities in his conduct. 

In the domain of literary and philosophic expression, the 
experience of madness in the fifteenth century generally takes the 
form of moral satire. Nothing suggests those great threats of 
invasion that haunted the imagination of the painters. On the 
contrary, great pains are taken to ward it off; one does not speak 
of such things. Erasmus turns our gaze from that insanity “which 
the Furies let slip from hell, each time they release their 
serpents”; it is not these insane forms that he has chosen to 
praise, but the “sweet illusion” that frees the soul from “its 
painful cares and returns it to the various forms of sensuality.” 
This calm world is easily mastered; it readily yields its naive 
mysteries to the eyes of the wise man, and the latter, by laughter, 
always keeps his distance. Whereas Bosch, Brueghel, and Diirer 
were terribly earth-bound spectators, implicated in that madness 
they saw surging around them, Erasmus observes it from far 


38 



enough away to be out of danger; he observes it from the heights 
of his Olympus, and if he sings its praises, it is because he can 
laugh at it with the inextinguishable laughter of the Gods. For 
the madness of men is a divine spectacle: “In fact, could one 
make observations from the Moon, as did Menippus, 
considering the numberless agitations of the Earth, one would 
think one saw a swarm of flies or gnats fighting among 
themselves, struggling and laying traps, stealing from one 
another, playing, gamboling, falling, and dying, and one would 
not believe the troubles, the tragedies that were produced by such 
a minute animalcule destined to perish so shortly.” Madness is 
no longer the familiar foreignness of the world; it is merely a 
commonplace spectacle for the foreign spectator; no longer a 
figure of the cosmos , but a characteristic of the aevum. 

But a new enterprise was being undertaken that would abolish 
the tragic experience of madness in a critical consciousness. Let 
us ignore this phenomenon for the moment and consider 
indiscriminately those figures to be found in Don Quixote as well 
as in Scudery’s novels, in King Lear as well as in the theater of 
Jean de Rotrou or Tristan fHermite. 

Let us begin with the most important, and the most durable— 
since the eighteenth century will still recognize its only just 
erased forms: madness by romantic identification. Its features have 
been fixed once and for all by Cervantes. But the theme is 
tirelessly repeated: direct adaptations (the Don Quichotte of 
Guerin de Bouscal was performed in 1639; two years later, he 
staged Le Gouvernement de Rancho Pan$a), reinterpretations of a 
