can be the universal substitute for all other physical therapeutics; 
it is only another way to produce the same sequence of effects. 
Between a cure by the passions and a cure by the prescriptions of 
the pharmacopoeia, there is no difference in nature; but only a 
diversity in the mode of access to those mechanisms which are 
common to the body and to the soul. “The passions must be 
utilized, if the sufferer cannot be led by reason to do what is 
necessary for the restoration of his health.” 

It is thus not possible to use as a valid or at least meaningful 
distinction for the classical period the difference—immediately 
apparent to us—between physical medications and psychological 
or moral medications. The difference only begins to exist in all 
its profundity the day when fear is no longer used as a method 
for arresting movement, but as a punishment; when joy does not 
signify organic expansion, but reward; when anger is nothing 
more than a response to concerted humiliation; in short, when 
the nineteenth century, by inventing its famous “moral 
methods,” has brought madness and its cure into the domain of 
guilt. The distinction between the physical and the moral 
becomes a practical concept in the medicine of the mind only 
when the problematics of madness shifts to an interrogation of 
the subject responsible. The purely moral space, which is then 
defined, gives the exact measurements of that psychological 
inwardness where modern man seeks both his depth and his 
truth. Physical therapeutics tends to become, in the first half of 


192 



the nineteenth century, a cure devised by an innocent 
determinism, and moral treatment a cure wrought by a culpable 
freedom. Psychology, as a means of curing, is henceforth 
organized around punishment. Before seeking to relieve, it 
inflicts suffering within the rigor of a moral necessity. “Do not 
employ consolations, they are useless; have no recourse to 
reasoning, it does not persuade; do not be sad with melancholics, 
your sadness sustains theirs; do not assume an air of gaiety with 
them, they are only hurt by it. What is required is great sang¬ 
froid, and when necessary, severity. Let your reason be their rule 
of conduct. A single string still vibrates in them, that of pain; 
have courage enough to pluck it. ”14 

The heterogeneity of the physical and the moral in medical 
thought is not a result of Descartes’s definition of substances; a 
century and a half of post-Cartesian medicine did not succeed in 
assimilating that separation on the level of problems and 
methods, nor in understanding the distinction of substances as 
an opposition of organic to psychological. Cartesian or anti- 
Cartesian, classical medicine never introduced Descartes’s 
metaphysical dualism into anthropology. And when the 
separation did occur, it was not by a renewed loyalty to the 
Meditations , but by a new privilege accorded to transgression. 
Only the use of punishment distinguished, in treating the mad, 
the medications of the body from those of the soul. A purely 
psychological medicine was made possible only when madness 
was alienated in guilt. 

Of this, however, a whole aspect of medical practice during 
the classical period might stand as a long denial. The 
psychological element, in its purity, seems to have its place 
among the techniques. How else explain the importance attached 
to exhortation, to persuasion, to reasoning, to that whole 
dialogue in which the classical physician engages with his 
patient, independently of the cure by bodily remedies? How 


193 


explain that Sauvages can write, in agreement with all his 
contemporaries: “One must be a philosopher to be able to cure 
the diseases of the soul. For as the origin of these diseases is 
nothing more than a violent desire for a thing which the sufferer 
envisages as a good, it is part of the physician’s duty to prove to 
him by solid reasons that what he desires so ardently is an 
apparent good but a real evil, in order to make him renounce his 
error.” 

In fact this approach to madness is neither more nor less 
psychological than any of those we have already discussed. 
Language, the formulations of truth or morality, are in direct 
contact with the body; and it is Bienville again, in his treatise on 
Nymphomania , who shows how the adoption or the rejection of 
an ethical principle can directly modify the course of organic 
processes. However, there is a difference in nature between those 
techniques which consist in modifying the qualities common to 
body and soul, and those which consist in treating madness by 
discourse. In the first case, the technique is one of metaphors, at 
the level of a disease that is a deterioration of nature; in the 
second, the technique is one of language, at the level of a 
madness perceived as reason s debate with itself. The technique, 
in this last form, functions in a domain where madness is 
“treated”—in all the senses of the word—in terms of truth and 
error. In short, there always existed, throughout the classical 
period, a juxtaposition of two technical universes in the 
therapeutics of madness. One, which is based on an implicit 
mechanics of qualities, and which addresses madness as 
