organized in terms of the greatest liberty and the greatest 
comfort for all, and that he would not be subject to any 
constraint so long as he did nothing against the rules of the 
house or the general principles of human morality. For his part, 
the keeper declared he had no desire to use the means of 
coercion at his disposal. “The maniac was sensible of the 
kindness of his treatment. He promised to restrain himself '” He 
sometimes still raged, shouted, and frightened his companions. 
The keeper reminded him of the threats and promises of the first 
day; if he did not control himself, it would be necessary to go 
back to the old ways. The patient’s agitation would then increase 
for a while, and then rapidly decline. “He would listen with 
attention to the persuasions and arguments of his friendly visitor. 
After such conversations, the patient was generally better for 
some days or a week.” At the end of four months, he left the 
Retreat, entirely cured. Here fear is addressed to the invalid 
directly, not by instruments but in speech; there is no question of 
limiting a liberty that rages beyond its bounds, but of marking 


257 



out and glorifying a region of simple responsibility where any 
manifestation of madness will be linked to punishment. The 
obscure guilt that once linked transgression and unreason is thus 
shifted; the madman, as a human being originally endowed with 
reason, is no longer guilty of being mad; but the madman, as a 
madman, and in the interior of that disease of which he is no 
longer guilty, must feel morally responsible for everything within 
him that may disturb morality and society, and must hold no one 
but himself responsible for the punishment he receives. The 
assignation of guilt is no longer the mode of relation that obtains 
between the madman and the sane man in their generality; it 
becomes both the concrete form of coexistence of each madman 
with his keeper, and the form of awareness that the madman 
must have of his own madness. 

We must therefore re-evaluate the meanings assigned to 
Tuke’s work: liberation of the insane, abolition of constraint, 
constitution of a human milieu—these are only justifications. 
The real operations were different. In fact Tuke created an 
asylum where he substituted for the free terror of madness the 
stifling anguish of responsibility; fear no longer reigned on the 
other side of the prison gates, it now raged under the seals of 
conscience. Tuke now transferred the age-old terrors in which 
the insane had been trapped to the very heart of madness. The 
asylum no longer punished the madman’s guilt, it is true; but it 
did more, it organized that guilt; it organized it for the madman 
