family mode. Henceforth, and for a period of time the end of 


264 



which it is not yet possible to predict, the discourse of unreason 
will be indissociably linked with the half-real, half-imaginary 
dialectic of the Family. So that what, in their violence, it was 
once obligatory to interpret as profanations or blasphemies, it 
would henceforth be necessary to see as an incessant attack 
against the Father. Thus in the modern world, what had been 
the great, irreparable confrontation of reason and unreason 
became the secret thrust of instincts against the solidity of the 
family institution and against its most archaic symbols. 

There is an astonishing convergence of the movement of 
fundamental institutions and this evolution of madness in the 
world of confinement. The liberal economy, as we have seen, 
tended to entrust the care of the poor and the sick to the family 
rather than to the State: the family thus became the site of social 
responsibility. But if the patient can be entrusted to the family, 
he is nonetheless mad, which is too strange and inhuman. Tuke, 
precisely, reconstitutes around madness a simulated family, 
which is an institutional parody but a real psychological 
situation. Where the family is inadequate, he substitutes for it a 
fictitious family decor of signs and attitudes. But by a very 
curious intersection, the day would come when the family was 
relieved of its responsibility to care for the patient in general, 
while it kept the fictitious values that concern madness; and long 
after the diseases of the poor had again become an affair of state, 
the asylum would keep the insane in the imperative fiction of the 
family; the madman remains a minor, and for a long time reason 
will retain for him the aspect of the Father. 

Closed upon these fictitious values, the asylum was protected 
from history and from social evolution. In Tuke’s mind, the 
problem was to constitute a milieu which would imitate the 
oldest, the purest, the most natural forms of coexistence: the 
most human milieu possible, while being the least social one 
possible. In fact, he isolated the social structure of the bourgeois 
family, reconstituted it symbolically in the asylum, and set it 


265 



adrift in history. The asylum, always oriented to anachronistic 
