this country of confinement, and with the act which designated 
confinement as its natural abode. 

A date can serve as a landmark: 1656, the decree that founded, 
in Paris, the Hopital General. At first glance, this is merely a 


50 



reform—little more than an administrative reorganization. 
Several already existing establishments are grouped under a 
single administration: the Salpetriere, rebuilt under the 
preceding reign to house an arsenal; Bicetre, which Louis XIII 
had wanted to give to the Commandery of Saint Louis as a rest 
home for military invalids; “the House and the Hospital of La 
Pitie, the larger as well as the smaller, those of Le Refuge, 
situated in the Faubourg Saint-Victor, the House and Hospital 
of Scipion, the House of La Savonnerie, with all the lands, 
places, gardens, houses, and buildings thereto appertaining.” 1 All 
were now assigned to the poor of Paris “of both sexes, of all ages 
and from all localities, of whatever breeding and birth, in 
whatever state they may be, able-bodied or invalid, sick or 
convalescent, curable or incurable.” These establishments had to 
accept, lodge, and feed those who presented themselves or those 
sent by royal or judicial authority; it was also necessary to assure 
the subsistence, the appearance, and the general order of those 
who could not find room, but who might or who deserved to be 
there. This responsibility was entrusted to directors appointed 
for life, who exercised their powers, not only in the buildings of 
the Hopital but throughout the city of Paris, over all those who 
came under their jurisdiction: “They have all power of authority, 
of direction, of administration, of commerce, of police, of 
jurisdiction, of correction and punishment over all the poor of 
Paris, both within and without the Hopital General.” The 
directors also appointed a doctor at a salary of one thousand 
livres a year; he was to reside at La Pitie, but had to visit each of 
the houses of the Hopital twice a week. 

From the very start, one thing is clear: the Hopital General is 
not a medical establishment. It is rather a sort of semijudicial 
structure, an administrative entity which, along with the already 
constituted powers, and outside of the courts, decides, judges, 
and executes. “The directors having for these purposes stakes, 


51 


irons, prisons, and dungeons in the said Hopital General and the 
places thereto appertaining so much as they deem necessary, no 
appeal will be accepted from the regulations they establish within 
the said hospital; and as for such regulations as intervene from 
without, they will be executed according to their form and tenor, 
notwithstanding opposition or whatsoever appeal made or to be 
made, and without prejudice to these, and for which, 
notwithstanding all defense or suits for justice, no distinction will 
be made.”- A quasi-absolute sovereignty, jurisdiction without 
appeal, a writ of execution against which nothing can prevail— 
the Hopital General is a strange power that the King establishes 
between the police and the courts, at the limits of the law: a third 
order of repression. The insane whom Pinel would find at 
Bicetre and at La Salpetriere belonged to this world. 

In its functioning, or in its purpose, the Hopital General had 
nothing to do with any medical concept. It was an instance of 
order, of the monarchical and bourgeois order being organized in 
France during this period. It was directly linked with the royal 
power which placed it under the authority of the civil 
government alone; the Grand Almonry of the Realm, which 
previously formed an ecclesiastical and spiritual mediation in the 
politics of assistance, was abruptly elided. The King decreed: 
“We choose to be guardian and protector of the said Hopital 
General as being of our royal founding and especially as it does 
not depend in any manner whatsoever upon our Grand Almonry, 
nor upon any of our high officers, but is to be totally exempt 
from the direction, visitation, and jurisdiction of the officers of 
the General Reform and others of the Grand Almonry, and from 
all others to whom we forbid all knowledge and jurisdiction in 
any fashion or manner whatsoever.” The origin of the project 
had been parliamentary, and the first two administrative heads 
appointed were the first President of the Parlement and the 
Procurator General. But they were soon supplemented by the 


52 


Archbishop of Paris, the President of the Court of Assistance, 
the President of the Court of Exchequer, the Chief of Police, 
and the Provost of Merchants. Henceforth the “Grand Bureau” 
had no more than a deliberative role. The actual administration 
and the real responsibilities were entrusted to agents recruited by 
co-optation. These were the true governors, the delegates of 
royal power and bourgeois fortune to the world of poverty. The 
Revolution was able to give them this testimony: “Chosen from 
the best families of the bourgeoisie,... they brought to their 
administration disinterested views and pure intentions.”3 

