at the news of his daughter s death, the fact is that she is not 
really dead; when Eraste, in Melite , sees himself pursued by the 
Eumenides and dragged before Minos, it is for a double crime 
which he might have committed, which he might have wanted to 
commit, but which in fact has not occasioned any real death. 
Madness is deprived of its dramatic seriousness; it is punishment 
or despair only in the dimension of error. Its dramatic function 
exists only insofar as we are concerned with a false drama; a 
chimerical form in which only supposed faults, illusory murders, 
ephemeral disappearances are involved. 

Yet this absence of seriousness does not keep madness from 
being essential—even more essential than it had been, for if it 
brings illusion to its climax, it is from this point that illusion is 
undone. In the madness in which his error has enveloped him, 
the character involuntarily begins to unravel the web. Accusing 
himself, he speaks the truth in spite of himself. In Melite , for 
example, all the stratagems the hero has accumulated to deceive 
others are turned against himself, and he becomes their first 
victim, believing that he is guilty of the deaths of his rival and his 
mistress. But in his delirium, he blames himself for having 
invented a whole series of love letters; the truth comes to light, in 


43 



and through madness, which, provoked by the illusion of a 
denouement, actually resolves the real imbroglio of which it is 
both cause and effect. To put it another way, madness is the false 
punishment of a false solution, but by its own virtue it brings to 
light the real problem, which can then be truly resolved. It 
conceals beneath error the secret enterprise of truth. It is this 
function of madness, both ambiguous and central, that the 
author of UOspital des fous employs when he portrays a pair of 
lovers who, to escape their pursuers, pretend to be mad and hide 
among madmen; in a fit of simulated dementia, the girl, who is 
dressed as a boy, pretends to believe she is a girl—which she 
really is—thus uttering, by the reciprocal neutralization of these 
two pretenses, the truth which in the end will triumph. 

Madness is the purest, most total form of qui pro quo\ it takes 
the false for the true, death for life, man for woman, the beloved 
for the Erinnys and the victim for Minos. But it is also the most 
rigorously necessary form of the qui pro quo in the dramatic 
economy, for it needs no external element to reach a true 
resolution. It has merely to carry its illusion to the point of truth. 
Thus it is, at the very heart of the structure, in its mechanical 
center, both a feigned conclusion, pregnant with a secret 
