

61 



orders “to arrest all the beggars of the kingdom; the marshalseas 
will perform this task in the countryside, while the same thing is 
done in Paris, whither they are sure not to return, being 
entrapped on all sides.” 

But outside of the periods of crisis, confinement acquired 
another meaning. Its repressive function was combined with a 
new use. It was no longer merely a question of confining those 
out of work, but of giving work to those who had been confined 
and thus making them contribute to the prosperity of all. The 
alternation is clear: cheap manpower in the periods of full 
employment and high salaries; and in periods of unemployment, 
reabsorption of the idle and social protection against agitation 
and uprisings. Let us not forget that the first houses of 
confinement appear in England in the most industrialized parts 
of the country: Worcester, Norwich, Bristol; that the first hopital 
general was opened in Lyons, forty years before that of Paris; that 
Hamburg was the first German city to have its Zuchthaus , in 
1620. Its regulations, published in 1622, were quite precise. The 
internees must all work. Exact record was kept of the value of 
their work, and they were paid a fourth of it. For work was not 
only an occupation; it must be productive. The eight directors of 
the house established a general plan. The Werkmeister assigned a 
task to each, and ascertained at the end of the week that it had 
been accomplished. The rule of work would remain in effect 
until the end of the eighteenth century, since John Howard could 
still attest that they were “knitting and spinning; weaving 
stockings, linen, hair, and wool—and rasping logwood and 
hartshorn. The quota of a robust man who shreds such wood is 
forty-five pounds a day. Some men and horses labour at a 
fulling-mill. A blacksmith works there without cease.” Each 
house of confinement in Germany had its specialty: spinning was 
paramount in Bremen, Brunswick, Munich, Breslau, Berlin; 
weaving in Hanover. The men shredded wood in Bremen and 
Hamburg. In Nuremberg they polished optical glass; at Mainz 


62 



the principal labor was the milling of flour. 

The first houses of correction were opened in England during 
