disturbed and darkened. It is in this relation, at the same time as 
in the destruction of this relation, that madness assumes its 
general meaning and its particular forms. Dementia, Zacchias 
says, using the term here in the most general sense of madness, 
“lay in this, that the intellect did not distinguish true from false.” 
But this breakdown, if we can understand it only as negation, has 
positive structures which give it singular forms. According to the 
different forms of access to the truth, there will be different types 
of madness. It is in this sense that Chrichton, for example, 
distinguishes in the order of vesanias, first the class deliria , which 
alter that relation to the truth which takes shape in perception 
(“general delirium of the mental faculties, in which the diseased 
perceptions are taken for realities”); then the class hallucinations, 
which alter representation (“error of the mind in which imaginary 
objects are taken for realities, or else real objects are falsely 
represented”); and last, the class dementias , which without 
abolishing or altering the faculties that afford access to truth, 
weaken them and diminish their powers. 

But we can also analyze madness starting with truth itself and 
with the forms proper to it. It is in this manner that the 
Encyclopedie distinguishes “physical truth” from “moral truth.” 
“Physical truth consists in the accurate relation of our sensations 
with physical objects”; there will be a form of madness 
determined by the impossibility of acceding to this form of truth; 
a kind of madness of the physical world which includes illusions, 
hallucinations, all perceptual disturbances; “it is a madness to 
hear choirs of angels, as certain enthusiasts do.” “Moral truth,” 
on the other hand, “consists in the exactitude of the relations we 
discern either between moral objects, or between those objects 
and ourselves.” There will be a form of madness consisting of the 
loss of these relations; such is the madness of character, of 
conduct, and of the passions. “Veritable madnesses, then, are all 
the derangements of our mind, all the illusions of self-love, and 
all our passions when they are carried to the point of blindness; 


115 



for blindness is the distinctive characteristic of madness.”! 8 

Blindness : one of the words which comes closest to the essence 
of classical madness. It refers to that night of quasi-sleep which 
surrounds the images of madness, giving them, in their solitude, 
an invisible sovereignty; but it refers also to ill-founded beliefs, 
mistaken judgments, to that whole background of errors 
inseparable from madness. The fundamental discourse of 
delirium, in its constitutive powers, thus reveals to what extent, 
despite analogies of form, despite the rigor of its meaning, it was 
not a discourse of reason. It spoke, but in the night of blindness; 
it was more than the loose and disordered text of a dream, since 
it deceived itself; but it was more than an erroneous proposition, 
since it was plunged into that total obscurity which is that of 
sleep. Delirium, as the principle of madness, is a system of false 
propositions in the general syntax of the dream. 

Madness is precisely at the point of contact between the 
oneiric and the erroneous; it traverses, in its variations, the 
surface on which they meet, the surface which both joins and 
separates them. With error, madness shares non-truth, and 
arbitrariness in affirmation or negation; from the dream, 
madness borrows the flow of images and the colorful presence of 
hallucinations. But while error is merely non-truth, while the 
dream neither affirms nor judges, madness fills the void of error 
with images, and links hallucinations by affirmation of the false. 
In a sense, it is thus plenitude, joining to the figures of night the 
powers of day, to the forms of fantasy the activity of the waking 
mind; it links the dark content with the forms of light. But is not 
such plenitude actually the culmination of the void? The presence 
of images offers no more than night-ringed hallucinations, 
figures inscribed at the corners of sleep, hence detached from any 
sensuous reality; however vivid they are, however rigorously 
established in the body, these images are nothingness, since they 
represent nothing; as for erroneous judgment, it judges only in 


116 


appearance: affirming nothing true or real, it does not affirm at 
all; it is ensnared in the non-being of error. 

Joining vision and blindness, image and judgment, 
hallucination and language, sleep and waking, day and night, 
madness is ultimately nothing, for it unites in them all that is 
negative. But the paradox of this nothing is to manifest itself, to 
explode in signs, in words, in gestures. Inextricable unity of order 
and disorder, of the reasonable being of things and this 
nothingness of madness! For madness, if it is nothing, can 
manifest itself only by departing from itself, by assuming an 
appearance in the order of reason and thus becoming the 
contrary of itself. Which illuminates the paradoxes of the 
classical experience: madness is always absent, in a perpetual 
retreat where it is inaccessible, without phenomenal or positive 
character; and yet it is present and perfectly visible in the singular 
evidence of the madman. Meaningless disorder as madness is, it 
reveals, when we examine it, only ordered classifications, 
rigorous mechanisms in soul and body, language articulated 
