them; a confinement that is not medical, but that ought to be the 
most efficacious and the easiest form of aid: “Of all the 
misfortunes that afflict humanity, the condition of madness is 
still one of those that with most reason call for pity and respect; 
it is for this condition that our attentions must with most reason 
be prodigal; when there is no hope of a cure, how many means 
still remain that can afford these unfortunates at least a tolerable 
existence.” In this text, the status of madness appears in all its 
ambiguity: it is necessary both to protect the confined population 
from its dangers, and to grant it the benefits of a special aid. 

The third stage was the great series of decrees issued between 
the twelfth and the sixteenth of March 1790. In them, the 
Declaration of the Rights of Man received a concrete 
application: “In the space of six weeks, beginning with the 
present decree, all persons detained in fortresses, religious 
houses, houses of correction, police houses, or other prisons 
whatsoever, by lettres de cachet or by order of the agents of the 
executive power, so long as they are not convicted, or under 
arrest, or not charged with major crimes, or confined by reason 
of madness, will be set at liberty.” Confinement is thus 
definitively reserved for certain categories of convicted criminals 
and for madmen. But for the latter, a special arrangement is in 
order: “Persons detained for reasons of dementia will be, for the 
space of three months, starting from the day of publication of the 


247 



present decree, at the suit of our procurators, interrogated by the 
magistrates in the usual manner, and by virtue of their 
disposition visited by physicians who, under the supervision of 
the directors of the district, will pronounce upon the true 
circumstances of the patients in order that, after the sentence 
that will have certified as to their condition, they may be released 
or cared for in hospitals indicated for that purpose.” It appears 
that the choice is henceforth made. On March 29, 1790, Bailly, 
Duport-Dutertre, and a police administrator went to La 
Salpetriere to determine in what manner this decree could be 
carried out; they then made a similar visit to Bicetre. The 
difficulties were numerous; to begin with, there existed no 
hospitals intended or at least reserved for the mad. 

In the face of these material difficulties, to which were added 
certain theoretical uncertainties, a long phase of hesitation was to 
begin. From all sides, the Assembly was asked to provide a text 
which would grant protection from madmen even before the 
promised creation of the hospitals. And by a regression, which 
was to be of great importance for the future, madmen were 
brought under the sway of immediate and unchecked measures 
adopted not even against dangerous criminals, but against 
marauding beasts. The Law of August 16-24, 1790, “entrusts to 
the vigilance and authority of the municipal bodies ... the care of 
obviating and remedying the disagreeable events that may be 
occasioned by madmen set at liberty, and by the wandering of 
vicious and dangerous animals.” The law of July 22, 1791, 
reinforces this arrangement, making families responsible for the 
supervision of the insane, and permitting the municipal 
authorities to take all measures that might prove useful: “The 
relatives of the insane must care for them, prevent them from 
straying, and see that they do not commit offenses or disorders. 
The municipal authority must obviate the inconvenience that 
may result from the negligence with which private persons fulfill 
this duty.” By this detour around their liberation, madmen 


248 



regained, but this time within the law itself, that animal status in 
which confinement had seemed to isolate them; they again 
became wild beasts at the very period when doctors began to 
attribute to them a gentle animality. But even though this legal 
disposition was put in the hands of the authorities, the problems 
were not solved thereby; hospitals for the insane still did not 
exist. 

Countless requests flooded the Ministry of the Interior. 
Delessart answered one of them, for example: “I feel as you do, 
Monsieur, how important it is that we labor without respite 
toward the establishment of houses designed to serve as retreats 
for the unfortunate class of the insane.... With regard to those 
insane persons whom the lack of such an establishment has 
relegated to the various prisons of your department, I do not see 
any other means at present of removing them from those places 
so unsuited to their state, except to transfer them temporarily, if 
possible, to Bicetre. It would therefore be appropriate for the 
Directory to write to the Paris establishment in order to ascertain 
a way to have them admitted to that house, where the costs of 
their upkeep will be paid by your department or by the 
communes where these unfortunates reside, if their families are 
not in a position to assume that expense/’ Bicetre thus became 
the great center to which all the insane were sent, especially once 
Saint-Lazare was closed. The same was true for the women at La 
Salpetriere: in 1792, two hundred madwomen were taken there 
who had been installed five years previously in the former 
novitiate of the Capucines on the Rue Saint-Jacques. But in the 
