Sometimes there were even arrangements which permitted 
private entrepreneurs to utilize the manpower of the asylums for 
their own profit. It was stipulated, for example, according to an 
agreement made in 1708, that an entrepreneur should furnish 
the Charite of Tulle with wool, soap, and coal, and in return the 
establishment would redeliver the wool carded and spun. The 
profit was divided between the entrepreneur and the hospital. 
Even in Paris, several attempts were made to transform the 
buildings of the Hopital General into factories. If we can believe 
the author of an anonymous memoire that appeared in 1790, at 
La Pitie “all the varieties of manufacture that could be offered to 
the capital” were attempted; finally, “in a kind of despair, a 
manufacture was undertaken of a sort of lacing found to be the 
least costly.” Elsewhere, such efforts were scarcely more fruitful. 
Numerous efforts were made at Bicetre: manufacture of thread 
and rope, mirror polishing, and especially the famous “great 
well.” An attempt was even made, in 1781, to substitute teams of 
prisoners for the horses that brought up the water, in relay from 
five in the morning to eight at night: “What reason could have 
determined this strange occupation? Was it that of economy or 
simply the necessity of busying the prisoners? If the latter, would 
it not have been better to occupy them with work more useful 
both for them and for the hospital? If for reasons of economy, we 


64 



are a long way from finding any.” During the entire eighteenth 
century, the economic significance Colbert wanted to give the 
Hopital General continued to recede; that center of forced labor 
would become a place of privileged idleness. “What is the source 
of the disorders at Bicetre?” the men of the Revolution were 
again to ask. And they would supply the answer that had already 
been given in the seventeenth century: “It is idleness. What is the 
means of remedying it? Work.” 

The classical age used confinement in an equivocal manner, 
making it play a double role: to reabsorb unemployment, or at 
least eliminate its most visible social effects, and to control costs 
when they seemed likely to become too high; to act alternately 
on the manpower market and on the cost of production. As it 
turned out, it does not seem that the houses of confinement were 
able to play effectively the double role that was expected of them. 
If they absorbed the unemployed, it was mostly to mask their 
poverty, and to avoid the social or political disadvantages of 
agitation; but at the very moment the unemployed were herded 
into forced-labor shops, unemployment increased in neighboring 
regions or in similar areas. As for the effect on production costs, 
