and unreason.” 

In doubt’s confrontation with its major dangers, Descartes 
realized that he could not be mad—though he was to 
acknowledge for a long time to come that all the powers of 
unreason kept vigil around his thought; but as a philosopher, 
resolutely undertaking to doubt, he could not be “one of these 
insane ones.” Rameau’s Nephew, though, knew quite well—and 
among his fleeting certainties, this was the most obstinate—that 
he was mad. “Before beginning, he heaved a profound sigh and 
raised his hands to his forehead; then he regained his calm 
demeanor and said to me: you know I am ignorant, mad, 
impertinent, and lazy.”l 

The eighteenth century could not exactly understand the 
meaning expressed in Le Neveu de Rameau. Yet something had 
happened, just when the text was written, which promised a 
decisive change. A curious thing: the unreason that had been 
relegated to the distance of confinement reappeared, fraught 
with new dangers and as if endowed with a new power of 
interrogation. Yet what the eighteenth century first noticed 
about it was not the secret interrogation, but only the social 
effects: the torn clothing, the arrogance in rags, the tolerated 
insolence whose disturbing powers were silenced by an amused 
indulgence. The eighteenth century might not have recognized 
itself in Rameau’s Nephew, but it was entirely present in the 1 
who served him as interlocutor and as a type of “exhibitor,” 
amused yet reticent, and with a secret anxiety: for this was the 


211 


first time since the Great Confinement that the madman had 
become a social individual; it was the first time that anyone had 
entered into conversation with him, and that, once again, he was 
questioned. Unreason reappeared as a classification, which is not 
much; but it nonetheless reappeared, and slowly recovered its 
place in the familiarity of the social landscape. It was there some 
ten years before the Revolution, when Mercier found it without 
more astonishment than: “Go into another cafe; a man whispers 
to you in a calm and confident tone: ‘You cannot imagine, 
Monsieur, the Governmenfs ingratitude toward me, and its 
blindness to its own interests! For thirty years I have neglected 
my own affairs; I have shut myself up in my study, meditating, 
dreaming, calculating; I have devised a project to pay all the 
State’s debts; another to enrich the King and assure him an 
income of 400 million; another to destroy England forever, 
whose very name affronts me.... When, utterly devoted to these 
vast operations that demand all the application of genius, I was 
distracted by domestic problems, some nagging creditors kept 
me in prison for three years.... But, Monsieur, you see how 
patriotism is valued—I die unknown and a martyr for my 
country.’ ”2 At a distance, such persons form a circle around 
Rameau’s Nephew; they do not have his dimensions; it is only in 
the search for the picturesque that they can pass for his epigones. 

And yet they are a little more than a social profile, a caricatural 
silhouette. There is something inside them that concerns and 
touches the unreason of the eighteenth century. Their chatter, 
their anxiety, that vague delirium and that ultimate anguish they 
experience commonly enough—and in real existences which can 
still be traced. As with the libertine, the debauchee, or the 
ruffian of the end of the seventeenth century, it is difficult to say 
whether they are mad, sick, or criminal. Mercier himself does 
not quite know what status to give them: “Thus there are in Paris 
some very good people, economists and anti-economists, who 


212 


have warm hearts, eager for the public good; but unfortunately 
they have cracked heads', that is, they are shortsighted, they do not 
know what century they are in, nor what men they are dealing 
with; more unbearable than idiots, because with pennies and 
false lights they start from an impossible principle and reason 
falsely therefrom.” They really existed, these schemers with 
“cracked heads,” adding a muffled accompaniment of unreason 
to the reason of the philosophers, and around those plans for 
reform, those constitutions, those projects; the rationality of the 
Enlightenment found in them a sort of darkened mirror, an 
inoffensive caricature. But is it not essential that in a movement 
of amused indulgence, a personage of unreason is allowed back 
into daylight, at the very moment he was believed to be most 
profoundly hidden in the space of confinement? As if classical 
reason once again admitted a proximity, a relation, a quasi¬ 
resemblance between itself and the images of unreason. As if, at 
the moment of its triumph, reason revived and permitted to drift 
on the margins of order a character whose mask it had fashioned 
in derision—a sort of double in which it both recognized and 
revoked itself. 

Yet fear and anxiety were not far off: in the reaction of 
confinement, they reappeared, doubled. People were once afraid, 
people were still afraid, of being confined; at the end of the 
eighteenth century, Sade was still haunted by fear of what he 
called “the black men” who lay in wait to put him away. But now 
the estate of confinement acquired its own powers; it became in 
its turn the birthplace of evil, and could henceforth spread that 
