easily perceived by our senses, which offer the soul agreeable 
relations because of the harmony of their consonance ... perform 
throughout the entire bodily machine a light activity which is 
beneficial to all the functions.” On the contrary, a knowledge too 
poor in these sensuous relations, too free with regard to the 
immediate, provokes a tension of the brain alone which 
disequilibrates the whole body; sciences “of things whose 
relationships are difficult to grasp because they are not readily 


228 



available to our senses, or because their too complicated relations 
oblige us to expend great application in their study, present the 
soul with an exercise that greatly fatigues the inner sense by a too 
continuous tension upon that organ.” Knowledge thus forms 
around feeling a milieu of abstract relationships where man risks 
losing the physical happiness in which his relation to the world is 
usually established. Knowledge multiplies, no doubt, but its cost 
increases too. Is it certain that there are more wise men today? 
One thing, at least, is certain: “there are more people who have 
the infirmities of wisdom.” The milieu of knowledge grows faster 
than knowledge itself. 

But it is not only knowledge that detaches man from feeling; it 
is sensibility itself: a sensibility that is no longer controlled by the 
movements of nature, but by all the habits, all the demands of 
social life. Modern man—but woman more than man—turns day 
into night and night into day: “The moment at which our 
women rise in Paris is far removed from that which nature has 
indicated; the best hours of the day have slipped away; the purest 
air has disappeared; no one has benefited from it. The vapors, 
the harmful exhalations, attracted by the sun’s heat, are already 
rising in the atmosphere; this is the hour that beauty chooses to 
rise.’ ”12 This disorder of the senses continues in the theater, 
where illusions are cultivated, where vain passions and the most 
fatal movements of the soul are aroused by artifice; women 
especially enjoy these spectacles “that inflame and arouse them”; 
their souls “are so strongly shaken that this produces a 
commotion in their nerves, fleeting, in truth, but whose 
consequences are usually serious; the momentary loss of their 
senses, the tears they shed at the performances of our modern 
tragedies are the least accidents that can result from them.”13 
Novels form a still more artificial milieu, and are more dangerous 
to a disordered sensibility; the verisimilitude modern authors 
attempt to produce, and all the art they employ to imitate truth, 


229 


only give more prestige to the violent and dangerous sentiments 
they seek to awaken in their female readers: “In the earliest 
epochs of French gallantry and manners, the less perfected minds 
of women were content with facts and events as marvelous as 
they were unbelievable; now they demand believable facts yet 
sentiments so marvelous that their own minds are disturbed and 
confounded by them; they then seek, in all that surrounds them, 
to realize the marvels by which they are enchanted; but 
everything seems to them without sentiment and without life, 
because they are trying to find what does not exist in nature.” 14 
The novel constitutes the milieu of perversion, par excellence, of 
all sensibility; it detaches the soul from all that is immediate and 
natural in feeling and leads it into an imaginary world of 
sentiments violent in proportion to their unreality, and less 
controlled by the gentle laws of nature; “The existence of so 
many authors has produced a host of readers, and continued 
reading generates every nervous complaint; perhaps of all the 
causes that have harmed women’s health, the principal one has 
been the infinite multiplication of novels in the last hundred 
years ... a girl who at ten reads instead of running will, at twenty, 
be a woman with the vapors and not a good nurse. ”15 

Slowly, and still in a very scattered fashion, the eighteenth 
century constituted, around its awareness of madness and of its 
threatening spread, a whole new order of concepts. In the 
landscape of unreason where the sixteenth century had located it, 
madness concealed a meaning and an origin that were obscurely 
moral; its secrecy related it to sin, and the animality imminently 
perceived in it did not make it, paradoxically, more innocent. In 
the second half of the eighteenth century, madness was no longer 
recognized in what brings man closer to an immemorial fall or an 
indefinitely present animality; it was, on the contrary, situated in 
those distances man takes in regard to himself, to his world, to 
all that is offered by the immediacy of nature; madness became 


230 


possible in that milieu where mans relations with his feelings, 
with time, with others, are altered; madness was possible because 
of everything which, in mans life and development, is a break 
with the immediate. Madness was no longer of the order of 
nature or of the Fall, but of a new order, in which men began to 
have a presentiment of history, and where there formed, in an 
obscure originating relationship, the “alienation” of the 
physicians and the “alienation” of the philosophers—two 
