Henceforth, more genuinely confined than he could have been in 
a dungeon and chains, a prisoner of nothing but himself, the 
sufferer was caught in a relation to himself that was of the order 
of transgression, and in a non-relation to others that was of the 
order of shame. The others are made innocent, they are no 
longer persecutors; the guilt is shifted inside, showing the 
madman that he was fascinated by nothing but his own 
presumption; the enemy faces disappear; he no longer feels their 
presence as observation, but as a denial of attention, as 
observation deflected; the others are now nothing but a limit that 
ceaselessly recedes as he advances. Delivered from his chains, he 
is now chained, by silence, to transgression and to shame. He 
feels himself punished, and he sees the sign of his innocence in 
that fact; free from all physical punishment, he must prove 
himself guilty. His torment was his glory; his deliverance must 
humiliate him. 

Compared to the incessant dialogue of reason and madness 
during the Renaissance, classical internment had been a 
silencing. But it was not total: language was engaged in things 
rather than really suppressed. Confinement, prisons, dungeons, 
even tortures, engaged in a mute dialogue between reason and 
unreason—the dialogue of struggle. This dialogue itself was now 
disengaged; silence was absolute; there was no longer any 
common language between madness and reason; the language of 
delirium can be answered only by an absence of language, for 
delirium is not a fragment of dialogue with reason, it is not 


272 



language at all; it refers, in an ultimately silent awareness, only to 
transgression. And it is only at this point that a common 
language becomes possible again, insofar as it will be one of 
acknowledged guilt. ‘‘Finally, after long hesitations, they saw him 
come of his own accord to join the society of the other 
patients ...” The absence of language, as a fundamental structure 
of asylum life, has its correlative in the exposure of confession. 
When Freud, in psychoanalysis, cautiously reinstitutes exchange, 
or rather begins once again to listen to this language, henceforth 
eroded into monologue, should we be astonished that the 
formulations he hears are always those of transgression? In this 
inveterate silence, transgression has taken over the very sources 
of speech. 

2. Recognition by Mirror. At the Retreat, the madman was 
observed, and knew he was observed; but except for that direct 
observation which permitted only an indirect apprehension of 
