
275 



madness is ceaselessly called upon to judge itself. But beyond 
this, it is at every moment judged from without; judged not by 
moral or scientific conscience, but by a sort of invisible tribunal 
in permanent session. The asylum Pinel dreamed of and partly 
realized at Bicetre, but especially at La Salpetriere, is a juridical 
microcosm. To be efficacious, this judgment must be 
redoubtable in aspect; all the iconographic apanage of the judge 
and the executioner must be present in the mind of the madman, 
so that he understands what universe of judgment he now 
belongs to. The decor of justice, in all its terror and 
implacability, will thus be part of the treatment. One of the 
inmates at Bicetre suffered from a religious delirium animated by 
a fear of hell; he believed that the only way he could escape 
eternal damnation was by rigorous abstinence. It was necessary to 
compensate this fear of a remote justice by the presence of a 
more immediate and still more redoubtable one: “Could the 
irresistible curse of his sinister ideas be counterbalanced other 
than by the impression of a strong and deep fear?” One evening, 
the director came to the patient’s door “with matter likely to 
produce fear—an angry eye, a thundering tone of voice, a group 
of the staff armed with strong chains that they shook noisily. 
They set some soup beside the madman and gave him precise 
orders to eat it during the night, or else suffer the most cruel 
treatment. They retired, and left the madman in the most 
distressed state of indecision between the punishment with 
which he was threatened and the frightening prospect of the 
torments in the life to come. After an inner combat of several 
hours, the former idea prevailed, and he decided to take some 
nourishment. ”15 

The asylum as a juridical instance recognized no other. It 
judged immediately, and without appeal. It possessed its own 
instruments of punishment, and used them as it saw fit. The old 
confinement had generally been practiced outside of normal 


276 


juridical forms, but it imitated the punishment of criminals, 
using the same prisons, the same dungeons, the same physical 
brutality. The justice that reigned in Pinefs asylum did not 
borrow its modes of repression from the other justice, but 
invented its own. Or rather, it used the therapeutic methods that 
had become known in the eighteenth century, but used them as 
chastisements. And this is not the least of the paradoxes of 
Pinefs “philanthropic” and “liberating” enterprise, this 
conversion of medicine into justice, of therapeutics into 
repression. In the medicine of the classical period, baths and 
showers were used as remedies as a result of the physicians’ 
vagaries about the nature of the nervous system: the intention 
was to refresh the organism, to relax the desiccated fibers; it is 
true that they also added, among the happy consequences of the 
cold shower, the psychological effect of the unpleasant surprise 
which interrupted the course of ideas and changed the nature of 
sentiments; but we were still in the landscape of medical 
speculation. With Pinel, the use of the shower became frankly 
juridical; the shower was the habitual punishment of the ordinary 
police tribunal that sat permanently at the asylum: “Considered 
as a means of repression, it often suffices to subject to the general 
law of manual labor a madman who is susceptible to it, in order 
to conquer an obstinate refusal to take nourishment, and to 
subjugate insane persons carried away by a sort of turbulent and 
reasoned humor.” 

Everything was organized so that the madman would 
recognize himself in a world of judgment that enveloped him on 
all sides; he must know that he is watched, judged, and 
condemned; from transgression to punishment, the connection 
must be evident, as a guilt recognized by all: “We profit from the 
circumstance of the bath, remind him of the transgression, or of 
the omission of an important duty, and with the aid of a faucet 
suddenly release a shower of cold water upon his head, which 
often disconcerts the madman or drives out a predominant idea 


277 



by a strong and unexpected impression; if the idea persists, the 
shower is repeated, but care is taken to avoid the hard tone and 
the shocking terms that would cause rebellion; on the contrary, 
the madman is made to understand that it is for his sake and 
reluctantly that we resort to such violent measures; sometimes we 
add a joke, taking care not to go too far with it.”16 This almost 
arithmetical obviousness of punishment, repeated as often as 
necessary, the recognition of transgression by its repression—all 
this must end in the internalization of the juridical instance, and 
the birth of remorse in the inmate’s mind: it is only at this point 
that the judges agree to stop the punishment, certain that it will 
continue indefinitely in the inmate’s conscience. One maniac had 
the habit of tearing her clothes and breaking any object that 
came into her hands; she was given showers, she was put into a 
straitjacket, she finally appeared “humiliated and dismayed”; but 
