he sees when he imagines. In the uniform lucidity of his closed 
senses, Descartes has broken with all possible fascination, and if 
he sees, he is certain of seeing that which he sees. While before 
the eyes of the madman, drunk on a light which is darkness, rise 
and multiply images incapable of criticizing themselves (since the 
madman sees them), but irreparably separated from being (since 
the madman sees nothing). 

Unreason is in the same relation to reason as dazzlement to 
the brightness of daylight itself. And this is not a metaphor. We 
are at the center of the great cosmology which animates all 


118 



classical culture. The “cosmos” of the Renaissance, so rich in 
internal communications and symbolisms, entirely dominated by 
the interacting presence of the stars, has now disappeared, 
without “nature” having yet assumed its status of universality, 
without its having received man’s lyrical recognition, subjecting 
him to the rhythm of its seasons. What the classical thinkers 
retain of the “world,” what they already anticipate in “nature,” is 
an extremely abstract law, which nonetheless forms the most 
vivid and concrete opposition, that of day and night. This is no 
longer the fatal time of the planets, it is not yet the lyrical time of 
the seasons; it is the universal but absolutely divided time of 
brightness and darkness. A form which thought entirely masters 
in a mathematical science—Cartesian physics is a kind of 
mathesis of light—but which at the same time traces the great 
tragic caesura in human existence: one that dominates the 
theatrical time of Racine and the space of Georges de la Tour in 
the same imperious fashion. The circle of day and night is the 
law of the classical world: the most reduced but the most 
demanding of the world’s necessities, the most inevitable but the 
simplest of nature’s legalities. 

A law which excludes all dialectic and all reconciliation; which 
establishes, consequently, both the flawless unity of knowledge 
and the uncompromising division of tragic existence; it rules over 
a world without twilight, which knows no effusion, nor the 
attenuated cares of lyricism; everything must be either waking or 
dream, truth or darkness, the light of being or the nothingness of 
shadow. Such a law prescribes an inevitable order, a serene 
division which makes truth possible and confirms it forever. 

And yet on either side of this order, two symmetrical, inverse 
figures bear witness that there are extremities where it can be 
transgressed, showing at the same time to what degree it is 
