scarcity of coin—the coincidence of these phenomena probably 
being due to a crisis in the Spanish economy. Even England, of 
all the countries of Western Europe the least dependent on the 
system, had to solve the same problems. Despite all the measures 
taken to avoid unemployment and the reduction of wages, 
poverty continued to spread in the nation. In 1622 appeared a 
pamphlet, Grievous Groan for the Poor , attributed to Thomas 
Dekker, which, emphasizing the danger, condemns the general 
negligence: “Though the number of the poor do daily increase, 


60 



all things yet worketh for the worst in their behalf;... many of 
these parishes turneth forth their poor, yea, and their lusty 
labourers that will not work ... to beg, filch, and steal for their 
maintenance, so that the country is pitifully pestered with them.” 
It was feared that they would overrun the country, and since they 
could not, as on the Continent, cross the border into another 
nation, it was proposed that they be “banished and conveyed to 
the New-found Land, the East and West Indies.” In 1630, the 
King established a commission to assure the rigorous observance 
of the Poor Laws. That same year, it published a series of “orders 
and directions”; it recommended prosecuting beggars and 
vagabonds, as well as “all those who live in idleness and will not 
work for reasonable wages or who spend what they have in 
taverns.” They must be punished according to law and placed in 
houses of correction; as for those with wives and children, 
investigation must be made as to whether they were married and 
their children baptized, “for these people live like savages 
without being married, nor buried, nor baptized; and it is this 
licentious liberty which causes so many to rejoice in 
vagabondage.” Despite the recovery that began in England in the 
middle of the century, the problem was still unsolved in 
Cromwelfs time, for the Lord Mayor complains of “this vermin 
that troops about the city, disturbing public order, assaulting 
carriages, demanding alms with loud cries at the doors of 
churches and private houses.” 

For a long time, the house of correction or the premises of the 
Hopital General would serve to contain the unemployed, the 
idle, and vagabonds. Each time a crisis occurred and the number 
of the poor sharply increased, the houses of confinement 
regained, at least for a time, their initial economic significance. 
In the middle of the eighteenth century, there was another great 
crisis: 12,000 begging workers at Rouen and as many at Tours; at 
Lyons the manufactories closed. The Count d’Argenson, “who 
commands the department of Paris and the marshalseas,” gave 


61 



orders “to arrest all the beggars of the kingdom; the marshalseas 
will perform this task in the countryside, while the same thing is 
done in Paris, whither they are sure not to return, being 
entrapped on all sides.” 

But outside of the periods of crisis, confinement acquired 
another meaning. Its repressive function was combined with a 
new use. It was no longer merely a question of confining those 
out of work, but of giving work to those who had been confined 
and thus making them contribute to the prosperity of all. The 
alternation is clear: cheap manpower in the periods of full 
employment and high salaries; and in periods of unemployment, 
reabsorption of the idle and social protection against agitation 
and uprisings. Let us not forget that the first houses of 
confinement appear in England in the most industrialized parts 
of the country: Worcester, Norwich, Bristol; that the first hopital 
general was opened in Lyons, forty years before that of Paris; that 
Hamburg was the first German city to have its Zuchthaus , in 
1620. Its regulations, published in 1622, were quite precise. The 
internees must all work. Exact record was kept of the value of 
their work, and they were paid a fourth of it. For work was not 
only an occupation; it must be productive. The eight directors of 
the house established a general plan. The Werkmeister assigned a 
task to each, and ascertained at the end of the week that it had 
been accomplished. The rule of work would remain in effect 
until the end of the eighteenth century, since John Howard could 
still attest that they were “knitting and spinning; weaving 
stockings, linen, hair, and wool—and rasping logwood and 
hartshorn. The quota of a robust man who shreds such wood is 
forty-five pounds a day. Some men and horses labour at a 
fulling-mill. A blacksmith works there without cease.” Each 
house of confinement in Germany had its specialty: spinning was 
paramount in Bremen, Brunswick, Munich, Breslau, Berlin; 
weaving in Hanover. The men shredded wood in Bremen and 
Hamburg. In Nuremberg they polished optical glass; at Mainz 


62 



the principal labor was the milling of flour. 

The first houses of correction were opened in England during 
