originating form of insanity? Why should it be in this discourse, 
whose forms we have seen to be so faithful to the rules of reason, 
that we find all those signs which will most manifestly declare 
the very absence of reason? 

A central question, but one to which the classical age has not 
formulated a direct answer. We must approach it obliquely, 
interrogating the experiences which are to be found in the 
immediate neighborhood of this essential language of madness: 
that is, the dream and the delusion. 

The quasi-oneiric character of madness is one of the constant 
themes in the classical period. A theme which doubtless derives 
from a very old tradition, to which Andre du Laurens, at the end 
of the sixteenth century, still testifies; for him melancholia and 
dreams have the same origin and bear, in relation to truth, the 
same value. There are “natural dreams” which represent what, 
during the preceding day, has passed through the senses or the 
understanding but happens to be modified by the specific 
temperament of the subject. In the same way, there is a 


111 



melancholia which has a merely physical origin in the disposition 
of the sufferer and alters, for his mind, the importance, the value, 
and so to speak the coloration of real events. But there is also a 
melancholia which permits the sufferer to predict the future, to 
speak in an unknown language, to see beings ordinarily invisible; 
this melancholia originates in a supernatural intervention, the 
same which brings to the sleepers mind those dreams which 
foresee the future, announce events to come, and cause him to 
see “strange things.” 

But in fact the seventeenth century preserves this tradition of 
the resemblance between madness and dreams only to break it all 
the more completely and to generate new, more essential 
relations. Relations in which madness and dreams are not only 
understood in their remote origin or in their imminent value as 
signs, but are confronted as phenomena, in their development, in 
their very nature. 

Dreams and madness then appeared to be of the same 
substance. Their mechanism was the same; thus Zacchias could 
identify in sleepwalking the movements which cause dreams, but 
which in a waking state can also provoke madness. 

In the first moments when one falls asleep, the vapors which 
