
And as a result, one was both more innocent and more guilty. 
More innocent, because one was swept by the total irritation of 
the nervous system into an unconsciousness great in proportion 
to one’s disease. But more guilty, much more guilty, because 
everything to which one was attached in the world, the life one 
had led, the affections one had had, the passions and the 
imaginations one had cultivated too complacently—all combined 
in the irritation of the nerves, finding there both their natural 
effect and their moral punishment. All life was finally judged by 
this degree of irritation: abuse of things that were not natural, 
the sedentary life of cities, novel reading, theatergoing, 
immoderate thirst for knowledge, “too fierce a passion for the 
sex, or that other criminal habit, as morally reprehensible as it is 
physically harmful. ”22 The innocence of the nervous sufferer, 
who no longer even feels the irritation of his nerves, is at bottom 
only the just punishment of a deeper guilt: the guilt which makes 
him prefer the world to nature: “Terrible state!... This is the 
torment of all effeminate souls whom inaction has plunged into 
dangerous sensuality, and who, to rid themselves of the labors 
imposed by nature, have embraced all the phantoms of opinion. 


167 


... Thus the rich are punished for the deplorable use of their 

fortune.”23 

We stand here on the threshold of the nineteenth century, 
where the irritability of the fibers will enjoy physiological and 
pathological fortunes. What it leaves for the moment, in the 
domain of nervous diseases, is nonetheless something very 
important. 

This is, on the one hand, the complete identification of 
hysteria and hypochondria as mental diseases. By the capital 
distinction between sensibility and sensation, they enter into that 
domain of unreason which we have seen was characterized by the 
essential moment of error and dream, that is, of blindness. As 
long as vapors were convulsions or strange sympathetic 
communications through the body, even when they led to 
fainting and loss of consciousness, they were not madness. But 
once the mind becomes blind through the very excess of 
sensibility—then madness appears. 

But on the other hand, such an identification gives madness a 
new content of guilt, of moral sanction, of just punishment 
which was not at all a part of the classical experience. It burdens 
