greater success. They date from the second half of the 
seventeenth century. An act of 1670 defined their status, 
appointed officers of justice to oversee the collection of taxes and 
the administration of sums that would permit their functioning, 
and entrusted the supreme control of their administration to a 
justice of the peace. In 1697 several parishes of Bristol united to 


55 



form the first workhouse in England, and to designate the 
corporation that would administer it. Another was established at 
Worcester in 1703, a third the same year at Dublin; then at 
Plymouth, Norwich, Hull, and Exeter. By the end of the 
eighteenth century, there were 126 of them. The Gilbert Act of 
1792 gives the parishes facilities to create new ones; at the same 
time, the control and authority of the justice of the peace is 
reinforced; to keep the workhouses from becoming hospitals, it is 
recommended that all contagious invalids be turned away. 

In several years, an entire network had spread across Europe. 
John Howard, at the end of the eighteenth century, undertook to 
investigate it; in England, Holland, Germany, France, Italy, 
Spain, he made pilgrimages to all the chief centers of 
confinement—“hospitals, prisons, jails”—and his philanthropy 
was outraged by the fact that the same walls could contain those 
condemned by common law, young men who disturbed their 
families’ peace or who squandered their goods, people without 
profession, and the insane. Proof that even at this period, a 
certain meaning had been lost: that which had so hastily, so 
spontaneously summoned into being all over Europe the 
category of classical order we call confinement. In a hundred and 
fifty years, confinement had become the abusive amalgam of 
heterogeneous elements. Yet at its origin, there must have 
existed a unity which justified its urgency; between these diverse 
forms and the classical period that called them into being, there 
must have been a principle of cohesion we cannot evade under 
the scandal of pre-Revolutionary sensibility. What, then, was the 
reality represented by this entire population which almost 
overnight found itself shut up, excluded more severely than the 
lepers? We must not forget that a few years after its foundation, 
the Hopital General of Paris alone contained six thousand 
persons, or around one per cent of the population. There must 
have formed, silently and doubtless over the course of many 
years, a social sensibility, common to European culture, that 


56 



suddenly began to manifest itself in the second half of the 
seventeenth century; it was this sensibility that suddenly isolated 
the category destined to populate the places of confinement. To 
inhabit the reaches long since abandoned by the lepers, they 
chose a group that to our eyes is strangely mixed and confused. 
But what is for us merely an undifferentiated sensibility must 
have been, for those living in the classical age, a clearly 
articulated perception. It is this mode of perception which we 
must investigate in order to discover the form of sensibility to 
madness in an epoch we are accustomed to define by the 
privileges of Reason. The act which, by tracing the locus of 
confinement, conferred upon it its power of segregation and 
provided a new homeland for madness, though it may be 
coherent and concerted, is not simple. It organizes into a 
complex unity a new sensibility to poverty and to the duties of 
assistance, new forms of reaction to the economic problems of 
unemployment and idleness, a new ethic of work, and also the 
dream of a city where moral obligation was joined to civil law, 
within the authoritarian forms of constraint. Obscurely, these 
themes are present during the construction of the cities of 
confinement and their organization. They give a meaning to this 
ritual, and explain in part the mode in which madness was 
perceived, and experienced, by the classical age. 

Confinement, that massive phenomenon, the signs of which 
are found all across eighteenth-century Europe, is a “police” 
matter. Police, in the precise sense that the classical epoch gave 
to it—that is, the totality of measures which make work possible 
and necessary for all those who could not live without it; the 
question Voltaire would soon formulate, Colbert’s 
contemporaries had already asked: “Since you have established 
yourselves as a people, have you not yet discovered the secret of 
forcing all the rich to make all the poor work? Are you still 
ignorant of the first principles of the police?” 


57 



Before having the medical meaning we give it, or that at least 
we like to suppose it has, confinement was required by 
something quite different from any concern with curing the sick. 
What made it necessary was an imperative of labor. Our 
philanthropy prefers to recognize the signs of a benevolence 
toward sickness where there is only a condemnation of idleness. 

