madness was present everywhere and mingled with every 
experience by its images or its dangers. During the classical 
period, madness was shown, but on the other side of bars; if 
present, it was at a distance, under the eyes of a reason that no 
longer felt any relation to it and that would not compromise 
itself by too close a resemblance. Madness had become a thing to 
look at: no longer a monster inside oneself, but an animal with 
strange mechanisms, a bestiality from which man had long since 
been suppressed. “I can easily conceive of a man without hands, 
feet, head (for it is only experience which teaches us that the 
head is more necessary than the feet). But I cannot conceive of 
man without thought; that would be a stone or a brute.”8 

In his Report on the Care of the Insane Desportes describes the 
cells of Bicetre as they were at the end of the eighteenth century: 
“The unfortunate whose entire furniture consisted of this straw 
pallet, lying with his head, feet, and body pressed against the 
wall, could not enjoy sleep without being soaked by the water 
that trickled from that mass of stone.” As for the cells of La 
Salpetriere, what made “the place more miserable and often more 
fatal, was that in winter, when the waters of the Seine rose, those 
cells situated at the level of the sewers became not only more 
unhealthy, but worse still, a refuge for a swarm of huge rats, 
which during the night attacked the unfortunates confined there 
and bit them wherever they could reach them; madwomen have 
been found with feet, hands, and faces torn by bites which are 
often dangerous and from which several have died.” But these 
were the dungeons and cells long reserved for the most 
dangerous and most violent of the insane. If they were calmer, 
and if no one had anything to fear from them, they were 
crammed into wards of varying size. One of Samuel Tuke’s most 
active disciples, Godfrey Higgins, had obtained the right, which 
cost him twenty pounds, to visit the asylum of York as a 
volunteer inspector. In the course of a visit, he discovered a door 


82 


that had been carefully concealed and found behind it a room, 
not eight feet on a side, which thirteen women occupied during 
the night; by day, they lived in a room scarcely larger. 

On the other hand, when the insane were particularly 
dangerous, they were constrained by a system which was 
doubtless not of a punitive nature, but simply intended to fix 
within narrow limits the physical locus of a raging frenzy. 
Sufferers were generally chained to the walls and to the beds. At 
Bethlehem, violent madwomen were chained by the ankles to the 
wall of a long gallery; their only garment was a homespun dress. 
At another hospital, in Bethnal Green, a woman subject to 
violent seizures was placed in a pigsty, feet and fists bound; when 
the crisis had passed she was tied to her bed, covered only by a 
blanket; when she was allowed to take a few steps, an iron bar 
was placed between her legs, attached by rings to her ankles and 
by a short chain to handcuffs. Samuel Tuke, in his Report on the 
Condition of the Indigent Insane , gives the details of a complicated 
system devised at Bethlehem to control a reputedly dangerous 
madman: he was attached by a long chain that ran over the wall 
and thus permitted the attendant to lead him about, to keep him 
on a leash, so to speak, from outside; around his neck had been 
placed an iron ring, which was attached by a short chain to 
another ring; this latter slid the length of a vertical iron bar 
fastened to the floor and ceiling of the cell. When reforms began 
to be instituted at Bethlehem, a man was found who had lived in 
this cell, attached in this fashion, for twelve years. 

When practices reach this degree of violent intensity, it 
becomes clear that they are no longer inspired by the desire to 
punish nor by the duty to correct. The notion of a “resipiscence” 
is entirely foreign to this regime. But there was a certain image 
of animality that haunted the hospitals of the period. Madness 
borrowed its face from the mask of the beast. Those chained to 
the cell walls were no longer men whose minds had wandered, 
but beasts preyed upon by a natural frenzy: as if madness, at its 


83 



extreme point, freed from that moral unreason in which its most 
attenuated forms are enclosed, managed to rejoin, by a paroxysm 
of strength, the immediate violence of animality. This model of 
animality prevailed in the asylums and gave them their cagelike 
aspect, their look of the menagerie. Coguel describes La 
Salpetriere at the end of the eighteenth century: “Madwomen 
seized with fits of violence are chained like dogs at their cell 
doors, and separated from keepers and visitors alike by a long 
corridor protected by an iron grille; through this grille is passed 
their food and the straw on which they sleep; by means of rakes, 
part of the filth that surrounds them is cleaned out.” At the 
hospital of Nantes, the menagerie appears to consist of individual 
cages for wild beasts. Never had Esquirol seen “such an 
extravagance of locks, of bolts, of iron bars to shut the doors of 
the cells.... Tiny openings pierced next to the doors were fitted 
with iron bars and shutters. Quite close to this opening hung a 
chain fastened to the wall and bearing at its end a cast-iron 
receptacle, somewhat resembling a wooden shoe, in which food 
was placed and passed through the bars of these openings.” 
