landscape of qualities which was decisive for the constitution of 
the melancholia-mania couple remained secondary in the history 
of hysteria and hypochondria, where it probably played no more 
than the role of continually shifted scenery. The progress of 
hysteria did not lead, as did that of mania, through the world’s 


153 



obscure qualities reflected in a medical imagery. The space in 
which it assumed its dimensions was of another kind: that of the 
body, in the coherence of its organic values and its moral values. 

It is customary to credit Charles le Pois and Willis with 
liberating hysteria from the old myths of uterine displacement. 
Jean Liebault, translating or rather adapting Marinello’s book to 
seventeenth-century standards, still accepted, despite some 
restrictions, the idea of a spontaneous movement of the womb; if 
it shifted position “it was to be more at ease; not that this was 
done out of prudence, behest, or animal stimulus, but to preserve 
health and to experience the enjoyment of something delectable.” 
No doubt, it was no longer deemed possible for the womb to 
change place or to course through the body somersaulting as it 
went, for it was “strictly attached” by its neck, by ligaments, by 
vessels, and finally by the tunic of the peritoneum; yet it could 
change position: “And so the womb, though it be so strictly 
attached to the parts we have described that it may not change 
place, yet often changes position, and makes curious and so to 
speak petulant movements in the womans body. These 
movements are various: to wit, ascending, descending, 
convulsive, vagrant, prolapsed. The womb rises to the liver, 
spleen, diaphragm, stomach, breast, heart, lung, gullet, and 
head.” The physicians of the classical period were almost 
unanimous in refusing to accept such an explanation. 

At the beginning of the seventeenth century, Le Pois could 
write, speaking of hysterical convulsions: “Of all these one source 
is the father, and this not through sympathy but through 
idiopathy.” More precisely, their origin is in an accumulation of 
fluids toward the posterior part of the skull: “Just as a river results 
from the confluence of a quantity of smaller vessels which join to 
form it, so the sinuses that are on the surface of the brain and 
terminate in the posterior part of the head amass the liquid 
because of the head’s inclined position. The heat of the parts 


154 



then causes the liquid to warm and affect the origin of the 
nerves.” Willis, in his turn, makes a minute critique of the 
uterine explanation: it is especially from affections of the brain 
and the nervous system “that all the derangements and 
irregularities which obtain in the movement of the blood during 
this illness derive.” And yet all these analyses did not thereby 
abolish the idea of an essential link between hysteria and the 
womb. But the link is differently conceived: it is no longer 
regarded as the trajectory of a real displacement through the 
body, but as a sort of secret propagation through the pathways of 
the organism and through functional proximities. We cannot say 
that the seat of the disease had become the brain, nor that Willis 
had made possible a psychological analysis of hysteria. But the 
brain now played the part of a relay station and the distributor of 
a disease whose origin was visceral: the womb occasioned it along 
with all the other viscera. Until the end of the eighteenth 
century, until Pinel, the uterus and the womb remained present 
in the pathology of hysteria, but as the result of a privileged 
diffusion by the humors and nerves, and not by a special prestige 
of their nature. 

Stahl justifies the parallelism of hysteria and hypochondria by 
a curious comparison of menstrual flow and hemorrhoids. He 
explains, in his analysis of spasmodic movements, that the 
hysterical affection is a violent pain, “accompanied by tension 
and compression, which makes itself principally felt below the 
hypochondriac regions.” It is called a hypochondriacal disease 
when it attacks men “in whom nature makes an effort to be rid of 
excess blood by vomiting or hemorrhoids”; it is called a hysterical 
affection when it attacks women “the course of whose periods is 
not as it should be. However, there is no essential difference 
between these two affections.” Hoffmans opinion is quite 
similar, in spite of many theoretical differences. The cause of 
hysteria is in the womb—loosening and weakening—but the seat 
of the disease is to be sought, as in the case of hypochondria, in 


155 



the stomach and the intestines; the blood and the vital humors 
begin to stagnate “in the membranous and nervous tunics of the 
intestines”; gastric disturbances result, which spread thence 
throughout the whole body. At the very center of the organism, 
the stomach serves as a relay station and diffuses the maladies 
that come from the interior and subterranean cavities of the 
body: “It is not to be doubted that the spasmodic affections 
