distinguishes madmen from sleepers; or in a positive fashion, 
delirium being defined as a modality of the dream, with the 
waking state as the specific difference: “Delirium is the dream of 


113 




waking persons.”!7 The ancients’ notion of the dream as a 
transitory form of madness is inverted; it is no longer the dream 
which borrows its disturbing powers from alienation—showing 
thereby how fragile or limited reason is; it is madness which 
takes its original nature from the dream and reveals in this 
kinship that it is a liberation of the image in the dark night of 
reality. 

The dream deceives; it leads to confusions; it is illusory. But it 
is not erroneous. And that is why madness is not exhausted in 
the waking modality of the dream, and why it overflows into 
error. It is true that in the dream, the imagination forges 
“impossible things and miracles,” or that it assembles lifelike 
figures “by an irrational method”; but, Zacchias remarks, “there 
is no error in these things, and consequently nothing insane.” 
Madness occurs when the images, which are so close to the 
dream, receive the affirmation or negation that constitutes error. 
It is in this sense that the Encyclopedic proposed its famous 
definition of madness: to depart from reason “with confidence 
and in the firm conviction that one is following it—that, it seems 
to me, is what is called being mad? Error is the other element 
always present with the dream, in the classical definition of 
insanity. The madman, in the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries, is not so much the victim of an illusion, of a 
hallucination of his senses, or of a movement of his mind. He is 
not abused ; he deceives himself. If it is true that on one hand the 
madman’s mind is led on by the oneiric arbitrariness of images, 
on the other, and at the same time, he imprisons himself in the 
circle of an erroneous consciousness: “We call madmen,” 
Sauvages was to say, “those who are actually deprived of reason 
or who persist in some notable error; it is this constant error of the 
soul manifest in its imagination, in its judgments, and in its 
desires, which constitutes the characteristic of this category.” 

Madness begins where the relation of man to truth is 


114 


