
shapes.”20 

Despite the formulations of it which certain disciples of 
Rousseau managed to propose, this return to the immediate was 
neither absolute nor simple. For madness, even if it is provoked 
or sustained by what is most artificial in society, appears, in its 
violent forms, as the savage expression of the most primitive 
human desires. Madness in the classical period, as we have seen, 
is rooted in the threats of bestiality—a bestiality completely 
dominated by predatory and murderous instincts. To entrust 
madness to nature would be, by an uncontrolled reversal, to 
abandon it to that fury of anti-nature. The cure of madness thus 
supposes a return to what is immediate, not in relation to desire, 
but in relation to the imagination—a return that dismisses from 
man’s life and pleasures everything that is artificial, unreal, 
imaginary. The therapeutics, by the reflective plunge into the 
immediate, secretly supposes the mediation of a wisdom which 
distinguishes, in nature, between what derives from violence and 


203 


what derives from truth. This is the whole difference between 
the Savage and the Laborer. “Savages ... lead the life of a 
carnivorous animal rather than that of a reasonable being”; the 
life of the Laborer, on the other hand, “is in fact happier than 
that of the man of the world.” On the savage’s side, immediate 
desire, without discipline, without constraint, without real 
morality; on the laborer’s side, pleasure without mediation, in 
other words, without vain stimulus, without provocation or 
imaginary achievement. What, in nature and its immediate 
virtues, cures madness is pleasure—but a pleasure that on one 
hand makes desire vain without even having to repress it, since it 
offers a plenitude of satisfaction in advance, and on the other 
makes imagination absurd, since it spontaneously contributes the 
happy presence of reality. “Pleasures enter into the eternal order 
of things; they exist invariably; certain conditions are necessary to 
form them ...; these conditions are not arbitrary; nature has 
formed them; imagination cannot create, and the man most 
devoted to pleasures can increase them only by renouncing all 
those which do not bear this stamp of nature. ”21 The immediate 
world of the laborer is thus a world suffused with wisdom and 
measure, which cures madness insofar as it renders desire useless, 
along with the movements of passion desire gives rise to, and 
also insofar as it reduces along with the imaginary all the 
possibilities of delirium. What Tissot understands by “pleasure” 
is this immediate curative agent, liberated from both passion and 
language: that is, from the two great forms of human experience 
