rise in the body and ascend to the head are many, turbulent, and 
dense. They are so dark that they waken no image in the brain; 
they merely agitate, in their chaotic dance, the nerves and the 
muscles. The same is true in the frenzied, in maniacs: they suffer 
few hallucinations, no false beliefs, but an intense agitation 
which they cannot manage to control. Let us continue the 
evolution of sleep: after the first period of turbulence, the vapors 
which rise to the brain are clarified, their movement organized; 
this is the moment when fantastic dreams are born; one sees 
miracles, a thousand impossible things. To this stage corresponds 
that of dementia, in which one is convinced of many things 
“which are not in real life.” Then at last the agitation of the 
vapors is calmed altogether; the sleeper begins to see things still 


112 



more clearly; in the transparency of the henceforth limpid vapors, 
recollections of the day before reappear in accordance with 
reality; such images are at most transposed, on one point or 
another—as occurs in melancholics, who recognize all things as 
they are, “in particular those who are not merely distracted.” 
Between the gradual developments of sleep—with what they 
contribute at each stage to the quality of the imagination—and 
the forms of madness, the analogy is constant, because the 
mechanisms are the same: the same movement of vapors and 
spirits, the same liberation of images, the same correspondence 
between the physical qualities of phenomena and the 
psychological or moral values of sentiments. “To emerge from 
the insane no differently than from the sleeping.”!6 

The important thing, in Zacchias’s analysis, is that madness is 
not associated with dreams in their positive phenomena, but 
rather to the totality formed by sleep and dreams together: that 
is, to a complex which includes—besides the image— 
hallucination, memory, or prediction, the great void of sleep, the 
night of the senses, and all that negativity which wrests man 
from the waking state and its apparent truths. Whereas tradition 
compared the delirium of the madman to the vivacity of the 
dream images, the classical period identified delirium only with 
the complex of the image and the night of the mind, against 
which background it assumed its liberty. And this complex, 
transposed entire into the clarity of the waking state, constituted 
madness. This is how we must understand the definitions of 
madness which insistently recur throughout the classical period. 
The dream, as a complex figure of image and sleep, is almost 
always present in that definition. Either in a negative fashion— 
the notion of the waking state then being the only one that 
distinguishes madmen from sleepers; or in a positive fashion, 
delirium being defined as a modality of the dream, with the 
waking state as the specific difference: “Delirium is the dream of 


113 




waking persons.”!7 The ancients’ notion of the dream as a 
transitory form of madness is inverted; it is no longer the dream 
which borrows its disturbing powers from alienation—showing 
thereby how fragile or limited reason is; it is madness which 
takes its original nature from the dream and reveals in this 
kinship that it is a liberation of the image in the dark night of 
reality. 

The dream deceives; it leads to confusions; it is illusory. But it 
is not erroneous. And that is why madness is not exhausted in 
the waking modality of the dream, and why it overflows into 
error. It is true that in the dream, the imagination forges 
“impossible things and miracles,” or that it assembles lifelike 
figures “by an irrational method”; but, Zacchias remarks, “there 
is no error in these things, and consequently nothing insane.” 
Madness occurs when the images, which are so close to the 
dream, receive the affirmation or negation that constitutes error. 
It is in this sense that the Encyclopedic proposed its famous 
definition of madness: to depart from reason “with confidence 
and in the firm conviction that one is following it—that, it seems 
to me, is what is called being mad? Error is the other element 
always present with the dream, in the classical definition of 
insanity. The madman, in the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries, is not so much the victim of an illusion, of a 
hallucination of his senses, or of a movement of his mind. He is 
not abused ; he deceives himself. If it is true that on one hand the 
madman’s mind is led on by the oneiric arbitrariness of images, 
on the other, and at the same time, he imprisons himself in the 
circle of an erroneous consciousness: “We call madmen,” 
Sauvages was to say, “those who are actually deprived of reason 
or who persist in some notable error; it is this constant error of the 
soul manifest in its imagination, in its judgments, and in its 
desires, which constitutes the characteristic of this category.” 

Madness begins where the relation of man to truth is 


114 


