general definition we can give of classical madness is indeed 
delirium'. “This word is derived from lira, a furrow; so that deliro 
actually means to move out of the furrow, away from the proper 
path of reason.”! Hence it is not surprising to find the 
eighteenth-century nosographers often classifying vertigo as a 
madness, and more rarely hysterical convulsions; this is because it 
is often impossible to find in hysterical convulsions the unity of a 
language, while vertigo affords the delirious affirmation that the 
world is really “turning around.” Such delirium is a necessary and 
sufficient reason for a disease to be called madness. 

4. Language is the first and last structure of madness , its 
constituent form; on language are based all the cycles in which 
madness articulates its nature. That the essence of madness can 
be ultimately defined in the simple structure of a discourse does 
not reduce it to a purely psychological nature, but gives it a hold 
over the totality of soul and body; such discourse is both the 
silent language by which the mind speaks to itself in the truth 
proper to it, and the visible articulation in the movements of the 
body. Parallelisms, complements, all the forms of immediate 
communication which we have seen manifested, in madness are 
suspended between soul and body in this single language and in 
its powers. The movement of passion which persists until it 
breaks and turns against itself, the sudden appearance of the 
image, and the agitations of the body which were its visible 
concomitants—all this, even as we were trying to reconstruct it, 
was already secretly animated by this language. If the 
determinism of passion is transcended and released in the 


110 


hallucination of the image, if the image, in return, has swept 
away the whole world of beliefs and desires, it is because the 
delirious language was already present—a discourse which 
liberated passion from all its limits, and adhered with all the 
constraining weight of its affirmation to the image which was 
liberating itself 

It is in this delirium, which is of both body and soul, of both 
language and image, of both grammar and physiology, that all 
the cycles of madness conclude and begin. It is this delirium 
whose rigorous meaning organized them from the start. It is 
madness itself, and also, beyond each of its phenomena, its silent 
transcendence, which constitute the truth of madness. 

A last question remains: In the name of what can this 
fundamental language be regarded as a delirium? Granting that it 
is the truth of madness , what makes it true madness and the 
originating form of insanity? Why should it be in this discourse, 
whose forms we have seen to be so faithful to the rules of reason, 
that we find all those signs which will most manifestly declare 
the very absence of reason? 

A central question, but one to which the classical age has not 
formulated a direct answer. We must approach it obliquely, 
interrogating the experiences which are to be found in the 
immediate neighborhood of this essential language of madness: 
that is, the dream and the delusion. 

The quasi-oneiric character of madness is one of the constant 
themes in the classical period. A theme which doubtless derives 
from a very old tradition, to which Andre du Laurens, at the end 
of the sixteenth century, still testifies; for him melancholia and 
dreams have the same origin and bear, in relation to truth, the 
same value. There are “natural dreams” which represent what, 
during the preceding day, has passed through the senses or the 
understanding but happens to be modified by the specific 
temperament of the subject. In the same way, there is a 


111 



melancholia which has a merely physical origin in the disposition 
of the sufferer and alters, for his mind, the importance, the value, 
and so to speak the coloration of real events. But there is also a 
melancholia which permits the sufferer to predict the future, to 
speak in an unknown language, to see beings ordinarily invisible; 
this melancholia originates in a supernatural intervention, the 
same which brings to the sleepers mind those dreams which 
foresee the future, announce events to come, and cause him to 
see “strange things.” 

But in fact the seventeenth century preserves this tradition of 
the resemblance between madness and dreams only to break it all 
the more completely and to generate new, more essential 
relations. Relations in which madness and dreams are not only 
understood in their remote origin or in their imminent value as 
signs, but are confronted as phenomena, in their development, in 
their very nature. 

Dreams and madness then appeared to be of the same 
substance. Their mechanism was the same; thus Zacchias could 
identify in sleepwalking the movements which cause dreams, but 
which in a waking state can also provoke madness. 

In the first moments when one falls asleep, the vapors which 
