form and mask, the madman is obliged to objectify himself in 
the eyes of reason as the perfect stranger, that is, as the man 
whose strangeness does not reveal itself. The city of reason 
welcomes him only with this qualification and at the price of this 
surrender to anonymity. 

We see that at the Retreat the partial suppression of physical 
constraint was part of a system whose essential element was the 
constitution of a “self-restraint” in which the patient’s freedom, 
engaged by work and the observation of others, was ceaselessly 
threatened by the recognition of guilt. Instead of submitting to a 
simple negative operation that loosened bonds and delivered 
one’s deepest nature from madness, it must be recognized that 
one was in the grip of a positive operation that confined madness 
in a system of rewards and punishments, and included it in the 
movement of moral consciousness. A passage from a world of 
Censure to a universe of Judgment. But thereby a psychology of 
madness becomes possible, for under observation madness is 
constantly required, at the surface of itself, to deny its 
dissimulation. It is judged only by its acts; it is not accused of 
intentions, nor are its secrets to be fathomed. Madness is 
responsible only for that part of itself which is visible. All the rest 
is reduced to silence. Madness no longer exists except as seen. 
The proximity instituted by the asylum, an intimacy neither 
chains nor bars would ever violate again, does not allow 
reciprocity: only the nearness of observation that watches, that 
spies, that comes closer in order to see better, but moves ever 
farther away, since it accepts and acknowledges only the values of 
the Stranger. The science of mental disease, as it would develop 
in the asylum, would always be only of the order of observation 


261 



and classification. It would not be a dialogue. It could not be that 
until psychoanalysis had exorcised this phenomenon of 
observation, essential to the nineteenth-century asylum, and 
substituted for its silent magic the powers of language, It would 
be fairer to say that psychoanalysis doubled the absolute 
observation of the watcher with the endless monologue of the 
person watched—thus preserving the old asylum structure of 
non-reciprocal observation but balancing it, in a non- 
symmetrical reciprocity, by the new structure of language 
without response. 

Surveillance and Judgment: already the outline appears of a 
new personage who will be essential in the nineteenth-century 
asylum. Tuke himself suggests this personage, when he tells the 
story of a maniac subject to seizures of irrepressible violence. 
One day while he was walking in the garden of the asylum with 
the keeper, this patient suddenly entered a phase of excitation, 
moved several steps away, picked up a large stone, and made the 
gesture of throwing it at his companion. The keeper stopped, 
looked the patient in the eyes; then advanced several steps 
toward him and “in a resolute tone of voice ... commanded him 
to lay down the stone”; as he approached, the patient lowered his 
hand, then dropped his weapon; “he then submitted to be quietly 
led to his apartment.” Something had been born, which was no 
longer repression, but authority. Until the end of the eighteenth 
century, the world of madmen was peopled only by the abstract, 
faceless power which kept them confined; within these limits, it 
was empty, empty of all that was not madness itself; the guards 
were often recruited among the inmates themselves. Tuke 
established, on the contrary, a mediating element between guards 
and patients, between reason and madness. The space reserved 
by society for insanity would now be haunted by those who were 
“from the other side” and who represented both the prestige of 
the authority that confines and the rigor of the reason that 
judges. The keeper intervenes, without weapons, without 


262 



instruments of constraint, with observation and language only; 
he advances upon madness, deprived of all that could protect 
him or make him seem threatening, risking an immediate 
confrontation without recourse. In fact, though, it is not as a 
concrete person that he confronts madness, but as a reasonable 
being, invested by that very fact, and before any combat takes 
place, with the authority that is his for not being mad. Reason's 
victory over unreason was once assured only by material force, 
and in a sort of real combat. Now the combat was always decided 
beforehand, unreason's defeat inscribed in advance in the 
concrete situation where madman and man of reason meet. The 
absence of constraint in the nineteenth-century asylum is not 
unreason liberated, but madness long since mastered. 

For this new reason which reigns in the asylum, madness does 
not represent the absolute form of contradiction, but instead a 
minority status, an aspect of itself that does not have the right to 
autonomy, and can live only grafted onto the world of reason. 
Madness is childhood. Everything at the Retreat is organized so 
that the insane are transformed into minors. They are regarded 
“as children who have an overabundance of strength and make 
dangerous use of it. They must be given immediate punishments 
and rewards; whatever is remote has no effect on them. A new 
