
Days and years ago Orestes had offered up this savage 
sacrifice. But now he expresses this principle of his madness as 
an end. For madness cannot go any farther. Having uttered its 
truth in its essential delirium, it can do no more than collapse in 
a third night, that night from which there is no return, the night 
of an incessant devouring. Unreason can appear only for a 
moment, the instant when language enters silence, when 
delirium itself is stilled, when the heart is at last devoured. 

In the tragedies of the early seventeenth century, madness, 
too, released drama; but it did so by liberating truth; madness 
still had access to language, to a renewed language of explanation 
and of reality reconquered. It could be at most only the 
penultimate moment of the tragedy. Not the last, as in 
Andromaque , in which no truth is uttered except the truth, in 
delirium, of a passion which has found with madness the 
perfection of its fulfillment. 

The movement proper to unreason, which classical learning 


124 



followed and pursued, had already accomplished the whole of its 
trajectory in the concision of tragic language. After which, 
silence could reign, and madness disappear in the—always 
withdrawn—presence of unreason. 

What we now know of unreason affords us a better 
understanding of what confinement was. 

This gesture, which banished madness to a neutral and 
uniform world of exclusion, did not mark a halt in the evolution 
of medical techniques, nor in the progress of humanitarian ideas. 
It assumed its precise meaning in this fact: that madness in the 
classical period ceased to be the sign of another world, and that it 
became the paradoxical manifestation of non-being. Ultimately, 
confinement did seek to suppress madness, to eliminate from the 
social order a figure which did not find its place within it; the 
essence of confinement was not the exorcism of a danger. 
Confinement merely manifested what madness, in its essence, 
was: a manifestation of non-being; and by providing this 
manifestation, confinement thereby suppressed it, since it 
restored it to its truth as nothingness. Confinement is the 
practice which corresponds most exactly to madness experienced 
as unreason, that is, as the empty negativity of reason; by 
confinement, madness is acknowledged to be nothing. That is, on 
one hand madness is immediately perceived as difference: 
whence the forms of spontaneous and collective judgment 
sought, not from physicians, but from men of good sense, to 
determine the confinement of a madman; and on the other hand, 
confinement cannot have any other goal than a correction (that 
is, the suppression of the difference, or the fulfillment of this 
nothingness in death); whence those options for death so often 
to be found in the registers of confinement, written by the 
attendants, and which are not the sign of confinement’s savagery, 
its inhumanity or perversion, but the strict expression of its 
meaning: an operation to annihilate nothingness.20 


125 


Confinement sketches, on the surface of phenomena and in a 
hasty moral synthesis, the secret and distinct structure of 
madness. 

Then did confinement establish its practices in this profound 
intuition? Was it because madness under the effect of 
confinement had really vanished from the classical horizon that it 
was ultimately stigmatized as non-being? Questions whose 
answers refer to each other in a perfect circularity. It is futile, no 
doubt, to lose oneself in the endless cycle of these forms of 
interrogation. Better to let classical culture formulate, in its 
general structure, the experience it had of madness, an experience 
which crops up with the same meanings, in the identical order of 
its inner logic, in both the order of speculation and the order of 
institutions, in both discourse and decree, in both word and 
watchword—wherever, in fact, a signifying element can assume 
for us the value of a language. 


126 



V 



127 


ASPECTS OF MADNESS 


IN this chapter we do not wish to write a history of the different 
