Includes bibliographical references. 

1. Psychiatry—History. 2. Mental illness. 

I. Title. 

RC438.F613 1973 '157’.2'09033 72-10582 

elSBN: 978-0-307-83310-5 

v3.1 


4 



INTRODUCTION 


MICHEL FOUCAULT has achieved something truly creative 
in this book on the history of madness during the so-called 
classical age: the end of the sixteenth and the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries. Rather than to review historically the 
concept of madness, the author has chosen to re-create, mostly 
from original documents, mental illness, folly, and unreason as 
they must have existed in their time, place, and proper social 
perspective. In a sense, he has tried to re-create the negative part 
of the concept, that which has disappeared under the retroactive 
influence of present-day ideas and the passage of time. Too 
many historical books about psychic disorders look at the past in 
the light of the present; they single out only what has positive 
and direct relevance to present-day psychiatry. This book 
belongs to the few which demonstrate how skillful, sensitive 
scholarship uses history to enrich, deepen, and reveal new 
avenues for thought and investigation. 

No oversimplifications, no black-and-white statements, no 
sweeping generalizations are ever allowed in this book; folly is 
brought back to life as a complex social phenomenon, part and 
parcel of the human condition. Most of the time, for the sake of 
clarity, we examine madness through one of its facets; as M. 
Foucault animates one facet of the problem after the other, he 
always keeps them related to each other. The end of the Middle 
Ages emphasized the comic, but just as often the tragic aspect of 
madness, as in Tristan and Iseult , for example. The Renaissance, 
with Erasmus’s Praise of Folly , demonstrated how fascinating 
imagination and some of its vagaries were to the thinkers of that 
day. The French Revolution, Pinel, and Tuke emphasized 
political, legal, medical, or religious aspects of madness; and 
today, our so-called objective medical approach, in spite of the 


5 



benefits that it has brought to the mentally ill, continues to look 
at only one side of the picture. Folly is so human that it has 
common roots with poetry and tragedy; it is revealed as much in 
the insane asylum as in the writings of a Cervantes or a 
Shakespeare, or in the deep psychological insights and cries of 
revolt of a Nietzsche. Correctly or incorrectly, the author feels 
that Freud’s death instinct also stems from the tragic elements 
which led men of all epochs to worship, laugh at, and dread folly 
simultaneously. Fascinating as Renaissance men found it—they 
painted it, praised it, sang about it—it also heralded for them 
death of the body by picturing death of the mind. 

Nothing is more illuminating than to follow with M. Foucault 
the many threads which are woven in this complex book, 
whether it speaks of changing symptoms, commitment 
procedures, or treatment. For example: he sees a definite 
connection between some of the attitudes toward madness and 
the disappearance, between 1200 and 1400, of leprosy. In the 
middle of the twelfth century, France had more than 2,000 
leprosariums, and England and Scotland 220 for a population of 
a million and a half people. As leprosy vanished, in part because 
of segregation, a void was created and the moral values attached 
to the leper had to find another scapegoat. Mental illness and 
unreason attracted that stigma to themselves, but even this was 
neither complete, simple, nor immediate. 

Renaissance men developed a delightful, yet horrible way of 
dealing with their mad denizens: they were put on a ship and 
entrusted to mariners because folly, water, and sea, as everyone 
then “knew,” had an affinity for each other. Thus, “Ships of 
Fools” crisscrossed the seas and canals of Europe with their 
comic and pathetic cargo of souls. Some of them found pleasure 
and even a cure in the changing surroundings, in the isolation of 
being cast off, while others withdrew further, became worse, or 
died alone and away from their families. The cities and villages 
which had thus rid themselves of their crazed and crazy, could 


6 



now take pleasure in watching the exciting sideshow when a ship 
