has reached us already enveloped in the reassuring dialectic of Socrates. 
But the Greek Logos had no contrary. 


10 



European man, since the beginning of the Middle Ages, has had a 
relation to something he calls, indiscriminately, Madness, Dementia, 
Insanity. Perhaps it is to this obscure presence that Western reason 
owes something of its depth, as the owqppoowri of the Socratic reasoners 
owes something to the threat of upQi?.. In any case, the Reason- 
Madness nexus constitutes for Western culture one of the dimensions op 
its originality; it already accompanied that culture long before 
Hieronymus Bosch, and will follow it long after Nietzsche and 
Artaud. 

What, then, is this confrontation beneath the language of reason f 
Where can an interrogation lead us which does notfollow reason in its 
horizontal course, but seeks to retrace in time that constant vertically 
which confronts European culture with what it is not, establishes its 
range by its own derangementf What realm do we enter which is 
neither the history of knowledge, nor history itself; which is controlled 
by neither the teleology of truth nor the rational sequence of causes, 
since causes have value and meaning only beyond the division f A 
realm, no doubt, where what is in question is the limits rather than 
the identity of a culture. 

The classical period—from Willis to Pinel, from the frenzies op 
Racine's Oreste to Sades Juliette and the Quinta del Sordo of Goya — 
covers precisely that epoch in which the exchange between madness 
and reason modifies its language, and in a radical manner. In the 
history of madness, two events indicate this change with a singular 
clarity: 1657, the creation of the Hopital General and the “great 
confinement ” of the poor; 1794, the liberation of the chained inmates 
of Bicetre. Between these two unique and symmetrical events, 
something happens whose ambiguity has left the historians of medicine 
at a loss: blind repression in an absolutist regime, according to some; 
but according to others, the gradual discovery by science and 
philanthropy of madness in its positive truth. As a matter of fact, 
beneath these reversible meanings, a structure is forming which does 
not resolve the ambiguity but determines it. It is this structure which 


11 



accountsfor the transition from the medieval and humanist experience 
