
224 


uncertainty, and the State abandons all to their fluctuations: 
“The English are a nation of merchants; a mind always occupied 
with speculations is continually agitated by fear and hope. 
Egotism, the soul of commerce, easily becomes envious and 
summons other faculties to its aid.” Besides, this liberty is far 
from true natural liberty: on all sides it is constrained and harried 
by demands opposed to the most legitimate desires of 
individuals: this is the liberty of interests, of coalitions, of 
financial combinations, not of man, not of minds and hearts. For 
financial reasons, families are here more tyrannical than 
anywhere else: only wealthy girls are able to marry; “the others 
are reduced to other means of satisfaction that ruin the body and 
derange the manifestations of the soul. The same cause favors 
libertinage, which predisposes to madness.” A mercantile liberty 
thus appears as the element in which opinion can never arrive at 
the truth, in which the immediate is necessarily subject to 
contradiction, in which time escapes the mastery and certainty of 
the seasons, in which man is dispossessed of his desires by the 
laws of interest. In short, liberty, far from putting man in 
possession of himself, ceaselessly alienates him from his essence 
and his world; it fascinates him in the absolute exteriority of 
other people and of money, in the irreversible interiority of 
passion and unfulfilled desire. Between man and the happiness 
of a world in which he recognizes himself, between man and a 
nature in which he finds his truth, the liberty of the mercantile 
state is “milieu”: and to this very degree it is the determining 
element of madness. When Spurzheim was writing—at the 
height of the Holy Alliance, during the restoration of the 
authoritarian monarchies—liberalism was readily blamed for all 
the sins of the world’s madness: “It is singular to see that man s 
greatest desire, which is his personal liberty, has its disadvantages 
as well.” But for us, the point of such an analysis is not its 
critique of liberty, but its very employment of the notion that 
designates for Spurzheim the non-natural milieu in which the 


225 



psychological and physiological mechanisms of madness are 
favored, amplified, and multiplied. 

2. Madness , Religion , and Time. Religious beliefs prepare a 
kind of landscape of images, an illusory milieu favorable to every 
hallucination and every delirium. For a long time, doctors were 
