time be a privileged site of mental cures, than this notion of a 
neutralized asylum, purified of those images and passions to 
which Christianity gave birth and which made the mind wander 
toward illusion, toward error, and soon toward delirium and 
hallucinations. 

But Pinefs problem was to reduce the iconographic forms, not 
the moral content of religion. Once “filtered,” religion possesses 
a disalienating power that dissipates the images, calms the 
passions, and restores man to what is most immediate and 
essential: it can bring him closer to his moral truth. And it is 
here that religion is often capable of effecting cures. Pinel relates 
several Voltairean stories. One, for example, of a woman of 
twenty-five, “of strong constitution, united in wedlock to a weak 
and delicate man”; she suffered “quite violent fits of hysteria, 
imagining she was possessed by a demon who followed her in 
different shapes, sometimes emitting bird noises, sometimes 
mournful sounds and piercing cries.” Happily, the local cure was 
more concerned with natural religion than learned in the 
techniques of exorcism; he believed in curing through the 
benevolence of nature; this “enlightened man, of kindly and 
persuasive character, gained ascendancy over the patient’s mind 
and managed to induce her to leave her bed, to resume her 
domestic tasks, and even to spade her garden.... This was 


267 



followed by the most fortunate effects, and by a cure that lasted 
three years.” Restored to the extreme simplicity of this moral 
content, religion could not help conniving with philosophy and 
with medicine, with all the forms of wisdom and science that can 
restore the reason in a disturbed mind. There are even instances 
of religion serving as a preliminary treatment, preparing for what 
will be done in the asylum: take the case of the young girl “of an 
ardent temperament, though very docile and pious” who was 
torn between “the inclinations of her heart and the severe 
principles of her conduct”; her confessor, after having vainly 
counseled her to attach herself to God, proposed examples of a 
firm and measured holiness, and “offered her the best remedy 
against high passions: patience and time.” Taken to La 
Salpetriere, she was treated, on Pinefs orders, “according to the 
same moral principles,” and her illness proved “of very short 
duration.” Thus the asylum assimilates not the social theme of a 
religion in which men feel themselves brothers in the same 
communion and the same community, but the moral power of 
consolation, of confidence, and a docile fidelity to nature. It must 
resume the moral enterprise of religion, exclusive of its fantastic 
