particular episode (Pichou’s Les Folies de Cardenio is a variation 
on the theme of the “Ragged Knight” of the Sierra Morena), or, 
in a more indirect fashion, satire on novels of fantasy (as in 
Subligny’s La Fausse Cle'lie , and within the story itself, as in the 
episode of Julie dArviane). The chimeras are transmitted from 
author to reader, but what was fantasy on one side becomes 
hallucination on the other; the writer’s stratagem is quite naively 


39 



accepted as an image of reality. In appearance, this is nothing but 
the simple-minded critique of novels of fantasy, but just under 
the surface lies an enormous anxiety concerning the 
relationships, in a work of art, between the real and the 
imaginary, and perhaps also concerning the confused 
communication between fantastic invention and the fascinations 
of delirium. “We owe the invention of the arts to deranged 
imaginations; the Caprice of Painters, Poets, and Musicians is 
only a name moderated in civility to express their Madness .”8 
Madness, in which the values of another age, another art, 
another morality are called into question, but which also reflects 
—blurred and disturbed, strangely compromised by one another 
in a common chimera—all the forms, even the most remote, of 
the human imagination. 

Immediately following this first form: the madness of vain 
presumption. But it is not with a literary model that the madman 
identifies; it is with himself, and by means of a delusive 
attachment that enables him to grant himself all the qualities, all 
the virtues or powers he lacks. He inherits the old Philautia of 
Erasmus. Poor, he is rich; ugly, he admires himself; with chains 
still on his feet, he takes himself for God. Such a one was 
Osuma’s master of arts who believed he was Neptune.9 Such is 
the ridiculous fate of the seven characters of Desmarets de Saint- 
Sorlin’s Les Visionnaires,of Chateaufort in Cyrano de Bergerac’s 
Le Pedant joue , of M. de Richesource in Sir Politik. Measureless 
madness, which has as many faces as the world has characters, 
ambitions, and necessary illusions. Even in its extremities, this is 
the least extreme of madnesses; it is, in the heart of every man, 
the imaginary relation he maintains with himself. It engenders 
the commonest of his faults. To denounce it is the first and last 
element of all moral criticism. 

To the moral world, also, belongs the madness of just 
punishment, which chastises, along with the disorders of the 


40 


mind, those of the heart. But it has still other powers: the 
punishment it inflicts multiplies by nature insofar as, by 
punishing itself, it unveils the truth. The justification of this 
madness is that it is truthful. Truthful since the sufferer already 
experiences, in the vain whirlwind of his hallucinations, what will 
for all eternity be the pain of his punishment: Eraste, in 
Corneille’s Melite , sees himself already pursued by the 
Eumenides and condemned by Minos. Truthful, too, because the 
crime hidden from all eyes dawns like day in the night of this 
strange punishment; madness, in its wild, untamable words, 
proclaims its own meaning; in its chimeras, it utters its secret 
truth; its cries speak for its conscience. Thus Lady Macbeth’s 
delirium reveals to those who “have known what they should 
not” words long uttered only to “dead pillows.” 

Then the last type of madness: that of desperate passion. Love 
disappointed in its excess, and especially love deceived by the 
fatality of death, has no other recourse but madness. As long as 
there was an object, mad love was more love than madness; left 
to itself, it pursues itself in the void of delirium. Punishment of a 
passion too abjectly abandoned to its violence? No doubt; but 
this punishment is also a relief; it spreads, over the irreparable 
absence, the mercy of imaginary presences; it recovers, in the 
paradox of innocent joy or in the heroism of senseless pursuits, 
the vanished form. If it leads to death, it is a death in which the 
lovers will never be separated again. This is Ophelia’s last song, 
this is the delirium of Ariste in La Folie du sage. But above all, 
this is the bitter and sweet madness of King Lear. 

In Shakespeare, madness is allied to death and murder; in 
Cervantes, images are controlled by the presumption and the 
complacencies of the imaginary. These are supreme models 
whose imitators deflect and disarm them. Doubtless, both testify 
more to a tragic experience of madness appearing in the fifteenth 
century, than to a critical and moral experience of Unreason 
developing in their own epoch. Outside of time, they establish a 


41 



link with a meaning about to be lost, and whose continuity will 
no longer survive except in darkness. But it is by comparing their 
work, and what it maintains, with the meanings that develop 
among their contemporaries or imitators, that we may decipher 
what is happening, at the beginning of the seventeenth century, 
