distance from the things which upset them, their associations 
with other pilgrims, the slow and energetic movement of 
walking, had more effect upon them than the comfortable 
journeys ... that in our day take the place of pilgrimages.” 
Finally, the sacred nature of the priest gave each of his 
injunctions an absolute value, and no one dreamed of trying to 
avoid it; “usually the whims of sick people deny all this to the 
physician.” For Moehsen, religion is the mediation between man 
and transgression, between man and punishment: in the form of 
an authoritarian synthesis, it suppresses the transgression by 
imposing the punishment; if, on the contrary, religion loosens its 
hold but maintains the ideal forms of remorse of conscience, of 
spiritual mortification, it leads directly to madness; only the 
consistency of the religious milieu can permit man to escape 
alienation in the excessive delirium of transgressions. By 
accomplishing its rites and its requirements, man avoids both the 
useless idleness of his passions before the transgression, and the 
vain repetition of his remorse once the transgression is 


227 


committed; religion organizes all human life around fulfillment 
of the moment. That old religion of happier times was the 
perpetual celebration of the present. But once it was idealized in 
the modern age, religion cast a temporal halo around the present, 
an empty milieu—that of idleness and remorse, in which the 
heart of man is abandoned to its own anxiety, in which the 
passions surrender time to unconcern or to repetition in which, 
finally, madness can function freely. 

3. Madness, Civilization , and Sensibility. Civilization, in a 
general way, constitutes a milieu favorable to the development of 
madness. If the progress of knowledge dissipates error, it also has 
the effect of propagating a taste and even a mania for study; the 
life of the library, abstract speculations, the perpetual agitation of 
the mind without the exercise of the body, can have the most 
disastrous effects. Tissot explains that in the human body it is 
those parts subject to frequent work which are first strengthened 
and hardened; among laborers, the muscles and fibers of the 
arms harden, giving them their physical strength and the good 
health they enjoy until an advanced age; “among men of letters, 
the brain hardens; often they become incapable of connecting 
their ideas,” and so are doomed to dementia. The more abstract 
or complex knowledge becomes, the greater the risk of madness. 
A body of knowledge still close to what is most immediate in the 
senses, requiring, according to Pressavin, only a little work on 
the part of the inner sense and organs of the brain, provokes only 
a sort of physiological happiness: “The sciences whose objects are 
