

question. In this confinement drained of a part of its content, 
these two figures—madness, crime—subsist alone; by 
themselves, they symbolize what may be necessary about it; they 
alone are what henceforth deserves to be confined. Having taken 
its distance, having finally become an assignable form in the 
confused world of unreason, did not liberate madness; between 
madness and confinement, a profound relation had been 
instituted, a link which was almost one of essence. 

But at the same moment, confinement suffered another, still 
deeper crisis that called into question not only its repressive role 
but its very existence; a crisis which arose not from within, and 
which was not attached to political protests, but which slowly 
appeared on the entire social and economic horizon. 

Poverty was gradually being freed from the old moral 
confusions. Men had seen unemployment assume, during crises, 
an aspect that could no longer be identified with that of sloth; 
had seen indigence and idleness forced to spread into the 
countryside, where men had supposed they could recognize 
precisely the most immediate and the purest forms of moral life; 
all this revealed that poverty was perhaps not only of the order of 
transgression: “Mendicity is the fruit of poverty, which itself is 
the result of accidents occurring either in the cultivation of the 
land or in the production of manufactures, or in the rise of 
commodity prices, in an excess of population, etc....”4 Poverty 
had become an economic phenomenon. 

But not contingent—nor destined to be suppressed forever. 
There was a certain quantity of indigence which man would not 
succeed in eliminating—a kind of fatality of poverty which must 
accompany all the forms of society to the end of time, even 
where all the idle were employed: “There need be, in a well- 
governed state, only those poor born in indigence, or those who 

fall into it by accident.” This basic poverty was in a sense 
inalienable: birth or accident, it formed a part of life that could 


240 



not be avoided. For a long time, it was inconceivable to have a 
state in which there were no paupers, so deeply did need appear 
to be inscribed in man s fate and in the structure of society: 
property, labor, and poverty are terms which remain linked in the 
thought of philosophers until the nineteenth century. 

Necessary because it could not be suppressed, this role of 
poverty was necessary too because it made wealth possible. 
Because they labor and consume little, those who are in need 
permit a nation to enrich itself, to set a high value on its fields, 
its colonies, and its mines, to manufacture products which will be 
sold the world over; in short, a people would be poor which had 
no paupers. Indigence becomes an indispensable element in the 
State. In it is concealed the secret but also the real life of a 
society. The poor constitute the basis and the glory of nations. 
And their poverty, which cannot be suppressed, must be exalted 
and revered: “My purpose is merely to attract a share of that 
vigilant attention [that of the government] to the suffering 
portion of the People ...; the succor it is owed derives essentially 
from the honor and the prosperity of an Empire, of which the 
Poor are everywhere the firmest support, for a sovereign cannot 
preserve and extend his realm without favoring the population, 
the cultivation of the Land, the Arts, and commerce; and the 
Poor are the necessary agents of these great powers which 

establish the true strength of a People.Here is an entire moral 
rehabilitation of the Pauper, which designates, at a deeper level, 
a social and economic reintegration of his role and character. In 
the mercantilist economy, the Pauper, being neither producer 
nor consumer, had no place: idle, vagabond, unemployed, he 
belonged only to confinement, a measure by which he was exiled 
and as it were abstracted from society. With the nascent industry 
which needs manpower, he once again plays a part in the body of 
the nation. 

Thus, economic thought elaborates on new foundations the 


241 


notion of poverty. There had been the entire Christian tradition 
for which the Poor Man had had a real and concrete existence, a 
presence of flesh and blood: an always individual countenance of 
need, the symbolic passage of God in man’s image. The 
abstraction of confinement had removed the Poor Man, had 
identified him with other figures, enveloping him in an ethical 
condemnation, but had not dissociated him from his features. 
The eighteenth century discovered that “the Poor” did not exist 
as a concrete and final reality; that in them, two realities of 
different natures had too long been confused. 

On one hand, there was Poverty, scarcity of commodities and 
money, an economic situation linked to the state of commerce, 
of agriculture, of industry. On the other, there was Population'. 
