28 



suggested that Bosch’s painting was part of a series of pictures 
illustrating the principal cantos of Brant’s poem. 

As a matter of fact, we must not be misled by what appears to 
be a strict continuity in these themes, nor imagine more than is 
revealed by history itself. It is unlikely that an analysis like the 
one Emile Male worked out for the preceding epochs, especially 
apropos of the theme of death, could be repeated. Between word 
and image, between what is depicted by language and what is 
uttered by plastic form, the unity begins to dissolve; a single and 
identical meaning is not immediately common to them. And if it 
is true that the image still has the function of speaking, of 
transmitting something consubstantial with language, we must 
recognize that it already no longer says the same thing ; and that 
by its own plastic values painting engages in an experiment that 
will take it farther and farther from language, whatever the 
superficial identity of the theme. Figure and speech still illustrate 
the same fable of folly in the same moral world, but already they 
take two different directions, indicating, in a still barely 
perceptible scission, what will be the great line of cleavage in the 
Western experience of madness. 

The dawn of madness on the horizon of the Renaissance is 
first perceptible in the decay of Gothic symbolism; as if that 
world, whose network of spiritual meanings was so close-knit, 
had begun to unravel, showing faces whose meaning was no 
longer clear except in the forms of madness. The Gothic forms 
persist for a time, but little by little they grow silent, cease to 
speak, to remind, to teach anything but their own fantastic 
presence, transcending all possible language (though still familiar 
to the eye). Freed from wisdom and from the teaching that 
organized it, the image begins to gravitate about its own 
madness. 

Paradoxically, this liberation derives from a proliferation of 
meaning, from a self-multiplication of significance, weaving 
relationships so numerous, so intertwined, so rich, that they can 


29 



no longer be deciphered except in the esoterism of knowledge. 
Things themselves become so burdened with attributes, signs, 
allusions that they finally lose their own form. Meaning is no 
