family.”14 This, then, is the ph ase of abasement: presumptuously 
identified with the object of his delirium, the madman 
recognizes himself as in a mirror in this madness whose absurd 
pretensions he has denounced; his solid sovereignty as a subject 
dissolves in this object he has demystified by accepting it. He is 
now pitilessly observed by himself. And in the silence of those 
who represent reason, and who have done nothing but hold up 


274 



the perilous mirror, he recognizes himself as objectively mad. 

We have seen by what means—and by what mystifications— 
eighteenth-century therapeutics tried to persuade the madman of 
his madness in order to release him from it. Here the movement 
is of an entirely different nature; it is not a question of 
dissipating error by the impressive spectacle of a truth, even a 
pretended truth; but of treating madness in its arrogance rather 
than in its aberration. The classical mind condemned in madness 
a certain blindness to the truth; from Pinel on, madness would 
be regarded rather as an impulse from the depths which exceeds 
the juridical limits of the individual, ignores the moral limits 
fixed for him, and tends to an apotheosis of the self. For the 
nineteenth century, the initial model of madness would be to 
believe oneself to be God, while for the preceding centuries it 
had been to deny God. Thus madness, in the spectacle of itself as 
unreason humiliated, was able to find its salvation when, 
imprisoned in the absolute subjectivity of its delirium, it 
surprised the absurd and objective image of that delirium in the 
identical madman. Truth insinuated itself, as if by surprise (and 
not by violence, in the eighteenth-century mode), in this play of 
reciprocal observations where it never saw anything but itself. 
But the asylum, in this community of madmen, placed the 
mirrors in such a way that the madman, when ail was said and 
done, inevitably surprised himself, despite himself, as a madman. 
Freed from the chains that made it a purely observed object, 
madness lost, paradoxically, the essence of its liberty, which was 
solitary exaltation; it became responsible for what it knew of its 
truth; it imprisoned itself in an infinitely self-referring 
observation; it was finally chained to the humiliation of being its 
own object. Awareness was now linked to the shame of being 
identical to that other, of being compromised in him, and of 
already despising oneself before being able to recognize or to 
know oneself. 

3. Perpetual Judgment. By this play of mirrors, as by silence, 

