to send them back to the cells, or to keep them in chains. And 
already, we can anticipate that from one century to the next, the 
same protests did not have, at bottom, the same value. Early in 
the nineteenth century, there was indignation that the mad were 
not treated any better than those condemned by common law or 
than State prisoners; throughout the eighteenth century, 
emphasis was placed on the fact that the prisoners deserved a 
better fate than one that lumped them with the insane. For 
Esquirol, the scandal is due to the fact that the mad are only 
mad; for the Prior of Senlis, to the fact that the convicts are, after 
all, only convicts. 

A difference which is perhaps not of such significance, and 
which ought to have been easily perceived. And yet, it is 
necessary to emphasize it in order to understand how the 
consciousness of madness was transformed in the course of the 
eighteenth century. It did not evolve in the context of a 
humanitarian movement that gradually related it more closely to 
the madman s human reality, to his most affecting and most 
intimate aspect; nor did it evolve under the pressure of a 
scientific need that made it more attentive, more faithful to what 
madness might have to say for itself. If it slowly changed, it was 
within that simultaneously real and artificial space of 
confinement. Certain imperceptible shifts in its structures, or at 
times certain violent crises, gradually formed the awareness of 
madness contemporaneous with the Revolution. No medical 
advance, no humanitarian approach was responsible for the fact 
that the mad were gradually isolated, that the monotony of 
insanity was divided into rudimentary types. It was the depths of 
confinement itself that generated the phenomenon; it is from 
confinement that we must seek an account of this new awareness 
of madness. 

A political more than a philanthropic awareness. For if the 


235 



eighteenth century perceived that there were among the confined 
—among the libertines, the debauched, the prodigal sons— 
certain men whose confusion and disorder were of another 
nature, and whose anxiety was irreducible, this perception was 
the result of the confined themselves. They were the first to 
protest, and with the most violence. Ministers, police officers, 
magistrates were assailed with the same endless and tirelessly 
repeated complaints: one man writes to Maurepas, indignant at 
being “forced to mingle with madmen, some of whom are so 
violent that at every moment I risk suffering dangerous abuse 
from them”; another—the Abbe de Montcrif—makes the same 
complaint to Lieutenant Berryer: “This is the ninth month that I 
have been confined here in this dreadful place with fifteen or 
twenty raving madmen, pell-mell with epileptics.” The farther 
we advance into the century, the stronger grow these protests 
against confinement: increasingly, madness becomes the specter 
of the internees, the very image of their humiliation, of their 
reason vanquished and reduced to silence. The day soon comes 
when Mirabeau recognizes in the shameful promiscuity of 
madness both a subtle instrument of brutality against those to be 
punished and the very image of despotism, bestiality triumphant. 
The madman is not the first and the most innocent victim of 
confinement, but the most obscure and the most visible, the 
most insistent of the symbols of the confining power. Tyranny 
secretly persists among the confined in this lurid presence of 
unreason. The struggle against the established powers, against 
the family, against the Church, continues at the very heart of 
confinement, in the saturnalia of reason. And madness so well 
represents these punishing powers that it effectively plays the 
part of an additional punishment, a further torment which 
maintains order in the uniform chastisement of the houses of 
correction. La Rochefoucauld-Liancourt bears witness to this in 
his report to the Committee on Mendicity: “One of the 
punishments inflicted upon the epileptics and upon the other 


236 



patients of the wards, even upon the deserving poor, is to place 
them among the mad.” The scandal lies only in the fact that the 
madmen are the brutal truth of confinement, the passive 
instrument of all that is worst about it. Is this not symbolized by 
the fact—also a commonplace of all the literature of confinement 
in the eighteenth century—that a sojourn in a house of 
correction necessarily leads to madness? Having to live in this 
delirious world, amid the triumph of unreason, how may one 
avoid joining, by the fatality of the site and the event, the very 
men who are its living symbol? “I observe that the majority of the 
insane confined in the houses of correction and the State prisons 
have become so, the latter through the excess of ill-treatment, 
the former through the horror of the solitude in which they 
continually encounter the harassments of an imagination 
sharpened by pain.”l 

The presence of madmen among the prisoners is not the 
scandalous limit of confinement, but its truth; not abuse, but 
essence. The polemic instituted by the eighteenth century against 
confinement certainly dealt with the enforced mingling of the 
