behind the walls of confinement, afraid of the powers forming 
there that threatened to propagate. The doctor came, once the 
conversion of images was effected, the disease having already 
assumed the ambiguous aspects of fermentation, of corruption, 
of tainted exhalations, of decomposed flesh. What is traditionally 
called “progress” toward madness’s attaining a medical status was 
in fact made possible only by a strange regression. In the 
inextricable mixture of moral and physical contagions,6 and by 
virtue of that symbolism of Impurity so familiar to the 
eighteenth century, very early images rose again to the surface of 
human memory. And it was as a result of this reactivation of 
images, more than by an improvement of knowledge, that 
unreason was eventually confronted by medical thought. 
Paradoxically, in the return to that fantastic life which mingles 
with the contemporary images of illness, positivism would gain a 
hold over unreason, or rather would discover a new reason for 
protecting itself against it. 


217 


The question, for the moment, was not to suppress the houses 
of confinement, but to neutralize them as potential causes of a 
new evil. The problem was to organize them while purifying 
them. The great reform movement that developed in the second 
half of the eighteenth century originated in the effort to reduce 
contamination by destroying impurities and vapors, abating 
fermentations, preventing evil and disease from tainting the air 
and spreading their contagion in the atmosphere of the cities. 
The hospital, the house of correction, all the places of 
confinement, were to be more completely isolated, surrounded 
by a purer air: this period produced a whole literature concerning 
the airing of hospitals, which tentatively approaches the medical 
problem of contagion, but aims more specifically at themes of 
moral communication. In 1776 a decree of the Council of State 
appointed a commission to determine “the degree of 
amelioration of which the various hospitals in France are in 
need.” Viel was instructed to rebuild the wards of La Salpetriere. 
The ideal was an asylum which, while preserving its essential 
functions, would be so organized that the evil could vegetate 
there without ever spreading; an asylum where unreason would 
be entirely contained and offered as a spectacle, without 
threatening the spectators; where it would have all the powers of 
example and none of the risks of contagion. In short, an asylum 
restored to its truth as a cage. It is this “sterilized” confinement, 
if we may employ an anachronistic term, that was still, in 1789, 
the dream of the Abbe Desmonceaux, in a little work dedicated 
to National Benevolence ; he planned to create a pedagogical 
instrument—a spectacle conclusively proving the drawbacks of 
