represent real objects, and judges accordingly.” But we must not 
forget that this psychological structure of mania, as it appeared 
and was stabilized at the end of the eighteenth century, is only 
the superficial sketch of an entire profound organization, which 
itself would capsize and which had developed according to the 
half-perceptual, half-iconographic laws of a qualitative world. 

No doubt this entire universe of heat and cold, of humidity 
and dryness, reminded medical thought, about to accede to 
positivism, of the circumstances of its own origin. But this 
blazon of images was not simply reminiscence; it was also an 
undertaking. In order to form the practical experience of mania 
or melancholia, this gravitation, against a background of images, 
of qualities attracted to each other by a whole system of sensuous 
and affective affinities was essential. If mania, if melancholia 
henceforth assumed the aspects our science knows them by, it is 
not because in the course of centuries we have learned to “open 
our eyes” to real symptoms; it is not because we have purified our 
perception to the point of transparency; it is because in the 
experience of madness, these concepts were organized around 
certain qualitative themes that lent them their unity, gave them 
their significant coherence, made them finally perceptible. We 
have passed from a simple notional description (fury without 
fever, delirious idee fixe) to a qualitative realm, apparently less 
organized, simpler, less precisely limited, but which alone was 
able to constitute recognizable, palpable units really present in the 
total experience of madness. The field of observation of these 
diseases was partitioned into landscapes that obscurely gave them 
their style and their structure. On the one hand, a sodden, almost 
diluvian world, where man remained deaf, blind, and numb to all 
that was not his one terror: a world simplified in the extreme, 
and immoderately enlarged in a single one of its details. On the 
other, a parched and desertic world, a panic world where all was 
flight, disorder, instantaneous gesture. It was the rigor of these 
themes in their cosmic form—not the approximations of an 


141 



observing caution—which organized the experience (already 
almost our own experience) of mania and melancholia. 

It is Willis, with his spirit of observation, the purity of his 
medical perception, whom we honor as the “discoverer” of the 
mania-melancholia alternation. Certainly Willis’s methods are of 
great interest, chiefly in this particular: the transition from one 
affection to the other is seen not as a phenomenon of observation 
for which it was then a matter of discovering the explanation, but 
rather as the consequence of a profound natural affinity which 
was of the order of their secret nature. Willis does not cite a 
single case of alternation which he had occasion to observe; what 
he first discovered was an internal relation which engendered 
strange metamorphoses: “After melancholia, we must consider 
mania, with which it has so many affinities that these complaints 
often change into one another”: it happens, in fact, that the 
melancholic predisposition, if aggravated, becomes frenzy; 
frenzy, on the contrary, when it decreases and loses its force, 
finally grows calm and turns to melancholic diathesis. A rigorous 
empiricism would see two related diseases here, or even two 
successive symptoms of the same disease. However, Willis does 
not pose the problem in terms of symptoms nor in terms of 
disease; he merely seeks the link connecting two states in the 
dynamics of animal spirits. In the melancholic, we remember, 
the spirits were somber and dim; they cast their shadows over the 
images of things and formed a kind of dark tide; in the maniac, 
on the contrary, the spirits seethed in a perpetual ferment; they 
were carried by an irregular movement, constantly repeated; a 
movement that eroded and consumed, and even without fever, 
sent out its heat. Between mania and melancholia, the affinity is 
evident: not the affinity of symptoms linked in experience, but 
the affinity—more powerful and so much more evident in the 
landscapes of the imagination—that unites in the same fire both 
smoke and flame. “If we can say that in melancholia, the brain 


142 



and the animal spirits are obscured by smoke and a dense vapor, 
mania seems to ignite a kind of conflagration hitherto muffled by 
them.” The flame in its rapid movement dissipates the smoke; 
but the smoke, when it falls back, smothers the flame and 
extinguishes its brightness. The combination of mania and 
melancholy is not, for Willis, a disease; it is a secret fire in which 
flame and smoke are in conflict; it is the vehicle of that light and 
that shadow. 

Virtually all of the physicians of the eighteenth century 
acknowledged the proximity of mania and melancholia. Several, 
however, refused to call them two manifestations of the same 
disease. Many observed a succession without perceiving a 
symptomatic unity. Sydenham prefers to divide the domain of 
mania itself: on one hand, ordinary mania—due to “an 
overexcited and too rapid blood”; on the other, a mania which, as 
a general rule, “degenerates into stupidity.” The latter “results 
from the weakness of the blood which too long a fermentation 
has deprived of its most spirituous parts.” Even more often, it is 
