that give birth to unreason. 

And perhaps nature, as the concrete form of the immediate, 
has an even more fundamental power in the suppression of 
madness. For it has the power of freeing man from his freedom. 
In nature—that nature, at least, which is measured by the double 
exclusion of the violence of desire and the unreality of 
hallucination—man is doubtless liberated from social constraints 


204 


(those which force him “to calculate and draw up the balance 
sheet of his imaginary pleasures which bear that name but are 
none”) and from the uncontrollable movement of the passions. 
But by that very fact, he is gently and as it were internally bound 
by a system of natural obligations. The pressures of the healthiest 
needs, the rhythm of the days and the seasons, the calm necessity 
to feed and shelter oneself, constrain the disorder of madmen to 
a regular observance. The excessively remote inventions of the 
imagination are dismissed, along with the excessively urgent 
disguises of desire. In the gentleness of a pleasure that does not 
constrain, man is linked to the wisdom of nature, and this 
fidelity in the form of freedom dissipates the unreason which 
juxtaposes in its paradox the extreme determinism of passion and 
the extreme fantasy of the image. Thus one begins to dream, in 
these mingled landscapes of ethics and medicine, of a liberation 
from madness: a liberation that must not be understood in its 
origin as the discovery, by philanthropy, of the humanity of 
madmen, but as a desire to open madness to the gentle 
constraints of nature. 

The old village of Gheel which, from the end of the Middle 
Ages, still bore witness to the now forgotten relation between the 
confinement of madmen and the exclusion of lepers, also 
received in the last years of the eighteenth century a sudden 
reinterpretation. What had once marked, here, the entire violent, 
pathetic separation of the world of madmen from the world of 
men, now conveyed the idyllic values of a rediscovered unity of 
unreason and nature. This village had once signified that 
madmen were confined, and that therefore the man of reason 
was protected from them; now it manifested that the madman 
was liberated, and that, in this liberty which put him on a level 
with the laws of nature, he was reconciled with the man of 
reason. At Gheel, according to Jouy s description of it, “four- 
fifths of the inhabitants are mad, but mad in the full sense of the 
word, and they enjoy without restraint the same freedom as the 


205 



other citizens.... Healthful food, pure air, all the devices of 
liberty: such is the regimen prescribed for them, and to which 
the greatest number, by the end of a year, owe their cure.” 
Without anything in the institutions having as yet really 
changed, the meaning of exclusion and of confinement begins to 
alter: it slowly assumes positive values, and the neutral, empty, 
nocturnal space in which unreason was formerly restored to its 
nothingness begins to be peopled by a nature to which madness, 
liberated, is obliged to submit. Confinement, as the separation of 
reason from unreason, is not suppressed; but at the very heart of 
its intention, the space it occupies reveals natural powers, more 
constraining for madness, more likely to subjugate it in its 
essence, than the whole of the old limiting and repressive system. 
Madness must be liberated from that system so that, in the space 
of confinement, now endowed with a positive efficacity, it will be 
free to slough off its savage freedom, and to welcome the 
demands of nature that are for it both truth and law. Insofar as it 
is law, nature constrains the violence of desire; insofar as it is 
truth, it reduces anti-nature, and all the hallucinations of the 
imaginary. 

Here is how Pinel describes that nature, speaking of the 
hospital of Saragossa: there has been established here “a sort of 
counterpoise to the mind’s extravagances by the attraction and 
the charm inspired by the cultivation of the fields, by the natural 
instinct that leads man to sow the earth and thus to satisfy his 
needs by the fruit of his labors. From morning on, you can see 
them ... leaving gaily for the various parts of a vast enclosure that 
belongs to the hospital, sharing with a sort of emulation the tasks 
appropriate to the seasons, cultivating wheat, vegetables, 
concerned in turn with the harvest, with trellises, with the 
vintage, with olive picking, and finding in the evening, in their 
solitary asylum, calm and quiet sleep. The most constant 
experience has indicated, in this hospital, that this is the surest 


206 



and most efficacious way to restore man to reason.”22 Beneath 
the conventional images, the rigor of a meaning is easily 
perceived. The return to the immediate is effective against 
unreason only insofar as the immediate is controlled—and 
divided against itself; an immediate in which violence is isolated 
from truth, savagery separated from liberty, in which nature can 
