itself, madness had no immediate grasp of its own character. 
With Pinel, on the contrary, observation operated only within 
the space defined by madness, without surface or exterior limits. 
Madness would see itself, would be seen by itself—pure spectacle 
and absolute subject. 

“Three insane persons, each of whom believed himself to be a 
king, and each of whom took the title Louis XVI, quarreled one 
day over the prerogatives of royalty, and defended them 
somewhat too energetically. The keeper approached one of them, 
and drawing him aside, asked: ‘Why do you argue with these 
men who are evidently mad? Doesn’t everyone know that you 
should be recognized as Louis XVI?’ Flattered by this homage, 
the madman immediately withdrew, glancing at the others with 
a disdainful hauteur. The same trick worked with the second 
patient. And thus in an instant there no longer remained any 
trace of an argument.”13 This is the first phase, that of 
exaltation. Madness is made to observe itself, but in others: it 


273 


appears in them as a baseless pretense—in other words, as 
absurd. However, in this observation that condemns others, the 
madman assures his own justification and the certainty of being 
adequate to his delirium. The rift between presumption and 
reality allows itself to be recognized only in the object. It is 
entirely masked, on the contrary, in the subject, which becomes 
immediate truth and absolute judge: the exalted sovereignty that 
denounces the others’ false sovereignty dispossesses them and 
thus confirms itself in the unfailing plenitude of presumption. 
Madness, as simple delirium, is projected onto others; as perfect 
unconsciousness, it is entirely accepted. 

It is at this point that the mirror, as an accomplice, becomes 
an agent of demystification. Another inmate of Bicetre, also 
believing himself a king, always expressed himself “in a tone of 
command and with supreme authority.” One day when he was 
calmer, the keeper approached him and asked why, if he were a 
sovereign, he did not put an end to his detention, and why he 
remained mingled with madmen of all kinds. Resuming this 
speech the following days, “he made him see, little by little, the 
absurdity of his pretensions, showed him another madman who 
had also been long convinced that he possessed supreme power 
and had become an object of mockery. At first the maniac felt 
shaken, soon he cast doubts upon his title of sovereign, and 
finally he came to realize his chimerical vagaries. It was in two 
weeks that this unexpected moral revolution took place, and after 
several months of tests, this worthy father was restored to his 
family.”14 This, then, is the ph ase of abasement: presumptuously 
identified with the object of his delirium, the madman 
recognizes himself as in a mirror in this madness whose absurd 
pretensions he has denounced; his solid sovereignty as a subject 
dissolves in this object he has demystified by accepting it. He is 
now pitilessly observed by himself. And in the silence of those 
who represent reason, and who have done nothing but hold up 


274 



the perilous mirror, he recognizes himself as objectively mad. 

We have seen by what means—and by what mystifications— 
eighteenth-century therapeutics tried to persuade the madman of 
his madness in order to release him from it. Here the movement 
is of an entirely different nature; it is not a question of 
dissipating error by the impressive spectacle of a truth, even a 
pretended truth; but of treating madness in its arrogance rather 
than in its aberration. The classical mind condemned in madness 
a certain blindness to the truth; from Pinel on, madness would 
be regarded rather as an impulse from the depths which exceeds 
the juridical limits of the individual, ignores the moral limits 
fixed for him, and tends to an apotheosis of the self. For the 
nineteenth century, the initial model of madness would be to 
believe oneself to be God, while for the preceding centuries it 
had been to deny God. Thus madness, in the spectacle of itself as 
unreason humiliated, was able to find its salvation when, 
imprisoned in the absolute subjectivity of its delirium, it 
surprised the absurd and objective image of that delirium in the 
identical madman. Truth insinuated itself, as if by surprise (and 
not by violence, in the eighteenth-century mode), in this play of 
reciprocal observations where it never saw anything but itself. 
But the asylum, in this community of madmen, placed the 
mirrors in such a way that the madman, when ail was said and 
done, inevitably surprised himself, despite himself, as a madman. 
Freed from the chains that made it a purely observed object, 
madness lost, paradoxically, the essence of its liberty, which was 
solitary exaltation; it became responsible for what it knew of its 
truth; it imprisoned itself in an infinitely self-referring 
observation; it was finally chained to the humiliation of being its 
own object. Awareness was now linked to the shame of being 
identical to that other, of being compromised in him, and of 
already despising oneself before being able to recognize or to 
know oneself. 

3. Perpetual Judgment. By this play of mirrors, as by silence, 

