stupor, would be readily classified as melancholia.8 And as early 
as James’s Dictionary , an apoplectic melancholia is discussed, in 
which the sufferers “refuse to rise from their beds...; once on 
their feet, they will not walk unless they are forced by their 
friends or attendants; they in no way avoid others, but they seem 
to pay no attention to what is said to them; they make no 
answer.” If, in this case, immobility and silence prevail and 
determine the diagnosis of melancholia, there are cases in which 
one observes only bitterness, languor, and a preference for 
isolation; their very agitation must not deceive the observer nor 
authorize a hasty diagnosis of mania; these patients are definitely 
suffering from melancholia, for “they avoid company, prefer 
solitary places, and wander without knowing where they are 
going; they have a yellowish color, a dry tongue as in a person 
suffering from great thirst, and their eyes are dry, hollow, never 
moistened with tears; their entire body is dry and burning hot, 
their face dark, and expressing only horror and sadness.”9 

The analyses of mania and their evolution during the classical 
period obey the same principles of coherence. 

Willis opposes mania to melancholia. The mind of the 
melancholic is entirely occupied by reflection, so that his 
imagination remains at leisure and in repose; the maniac’s 
imagination, on the contrary, is occupied by a perpetual flux of 
impetuous thoughts. While the melancholic’s mind is fixed on a 
single object, imposing unreasonable proportions upon it, but 
upon it alone, mania deforms all concepts and ideas; either they 
lose their congruence, or their representative value is falsified; in 
any case, the totality of thought is disturbed in its essential 
relation to truth. Melancholia, finally, is always accompanied by 
sadness and fear; on the contrary, in the maniac we find audacity 


136 


and fury. Whether it is a question of mania or melancholia, the 
cause of the disease is always in the movement of the animal 
spirits. But this movement is quite particular in mania: it is 
continuous, violent, always capable of piercing new pores in the 
cerebral matter, and it creates, as the material basis of incoherent 
thoughts, explosive gestures, continuous words which betray 
mania. Is not such pernicious mobility that of an infernal water, 
sulfurous liquid, those aquae stygiae , ex nitro , vitriolo , antimonio , 
arsenico , et similibus exstillatae : its particles are in perpetual 
movement; they are capable of provoking new pores and new 
channels in any substance; and they have strength enough to 
spread themselves far, exactly as the maniacal spirits are capable 
of spreading agitation through all the parts of the body. An 
infernal water gathers in the secrecy of its movements all the 
images in which mania takes its concrete form. It constitutes, in 
an indissociable way, both its chemical myth and its dynamic 
truth. 

In the course of the eighteenth century, the image, with all its 
mechanical and metaphysical implications, of animal spirits in 
the channels of the nerves, was frequently replaced by the image, 
more strictly physical but of an even more symbolic value, of a 
tension to which nerves, vessels, and the entire system of organic 
fibers were subject. Mania was thus a tension of the fibers carried 
to its paroxysm, the maniac a sort of instrument whose strings, 
by the effect of an exaggerated traction, began to vibrate at the 
remotest and faintest stimulus. Maniacal delirium consisted of a 
continual vibration of the sensibility. Through this image, the 
differences from melancholia became precise and were organized 
into a rigorous antithesis: the melancholic can no longer enter 
into a resonance with the external world, because his fibers are 
relaxed or because they have been immobilized by too great a 
tension (we see how the mechanics of tension explains 
melancholic immobility as well as maniacal agitation): only a few 
fibers vibrate in the melancholic, those which correspond to the 


137 



precise point of his delirium. On the contrary, the maniac 
vibrates to any and every stimulus; his delirium is universal; 
stimuli do not vanish into the density of his immobility, as in the 
melancholic’s case; when his organism returns them, they have 
been multiplied, as if the maniac had accumulated a 
supplementary energy in the tension of his fibers. It is this very 
fact, moreover, that makes the maniac, in his turn, insensible, 
not with the somnolent insensibility of the melancholic, but with 
an insensibility taut with interior vibrations; this is doubtless why 
maniacs “fear neither heat nor cold, tear off their clothes, sleep 
naked in the dead of winter without feeling the cold.” It is also 
why they substitute for the real world, which nonetheless 
continues to solicit them, the unreal and chimerical world of 
their delirium: “The essential symptoms of mania result from the 
fact that objects do not present themselves to the sufferers as 
they are in reality.”!0 The delirium of maniacs is not determined 
by a particular error of judgment; it constitutes a defect in the 
transmission of sense impressions to the brain, a flaw in 
communication. In the psychology of madness, the old idea of 
truth as “the conformity of thought to things” is transposed in 
the metaphor of a resonance, a kind of musical fidelity of the 
fibers to the sensations which make them vibrate. 
