was certainly, at least in the beginning, a victory for the 
Parlement. It was, in any case, a new solution. For the first time, 
purely negative measures of exclusion were replaced by a measure 
of confinement; the unemployed person was no longer driven 
away or punished; he was taken in charge, at the expense of the 
nation but at the cost of his individual liberty. Between him and 
society, an implicit system of obligation was established: he had 
the right to be fed, but he must accept the physical and moral 
constraint of confinement. 

It is this entire, rather undifferentiated mass at which the edict 
of 1657 is aimed: a population without resources, without social 
moorings, a class rejected or rendered mobile by new economic 
developments. Less than two weeks after it was signed, the edict 
was read and proclaimed in the streets. Paragraph 9: “We 
expressly prohibit and forbid all persons of either sex, of any 
locality and of any age, of whatever breeding and birth, and in 
whatever condition they may be, able-bodied or invalid, sick or 


59 



convalescent, curable or incurable, to beg in the city and suburbs 
of Paris, neither in the churches, nor at the doors of such, nor at 
the doors of houses nor in the streets, nor anywhere else in 
public, nor in secret, by day or night ... under pain of being 
whipped for the first offense, and for the second condemned to 
the galleys if men and boys, banished if women and girls.” The 
year after—Sunday, May 13, 1657—a high mass in honor of the 
Holy Ghost was sung at the Church of Saint-Louis de la Pitie, 
and on the morning of Monday the fourteenth, the militia, 
which was to become, in the mythology of popular terror, “the 
archers of the Hopital,” began to hunt down beggars and herd 
them into the different buildings of the Hopital. Four years later, 
La Salpetriere housed 1,460 women and small children; at La 
Pitie there were 98 boys, 897 girls between seven and seventeen, 
and 95 women; at Bicetre, 1,615 adult men; at La Savonnerie, 
305 boys between eight and thirteen; finally, Scipion lodged 530 
pregnant women, nursing women, and very young children. 
Initially, married people, even in need, were not admitted; the 
administration was instructed to feed them at home; but soon, 
thanks to a grant from Mazarin, it was possible to lodge them at 
La Salpetriere. In all, between five and six thousand persons. 

Throughout Europe, confinement had the same meaning, at 
least if we consider its origin. It constituted one of the answers 
the seventeenth century gave to an economic crisis that affected 
the entire Western world: reduction of wages, unemployment, 
