calm rivers of the Rhineland and the Flemish canals. 

The Narrenschiff, of course, is a literary composition, probably 
borrowed from the old Argonaut cycle, one of the great mythic 
themes recently revived and rejuvenated, acquiring an 
institutional aspect in the Burgundy Estates. Fashion favored the 
composition of these Ships, whose crew of imaginary heroes, 
ethical models, or social types embarked on a great symbolic 
voyage which would bring them, if not fortune, then at least the 
figure of their destiny or their truth. Thus Symphorien 
Champier composes a Ship of Princes and Battles of Nobility in 
1502, then a Ship of Virtuous Ladies in 1503; there is also a Ship of 
Health , alongside the Blauwe Schute of Jacob van Oestvoren in 
1413, Sebastian Brant’s Narrenschiff (1494), and the work of 
Josse Bade: Stultiferae naviculae scaphae fatuarum mulierum 
(1498). Bosch’s painting, of course, belongs to this dream fleet. 

But of all these romantic or satiric vessels, the Narrenschiff is 
the only one that had a real existence—for they did exist, these 
boats that conveyed their insane cargo from town to town. 
Madmen then led an easy wandering existence. The towns drove 
them outside their limits; they were allowed to wander in the 
open countryside, when not entrusted to a group of merchants 
and pilgrims. The custom was especially frequent in Germany; in 
Nuremberg, in the first half of the fifteenth century, the presence 
of 63 madmen had been registered; 31 were driven away; in the 


19 



fifty years that followed, there are records of 21 more obligatory 
departures; and these are only the madmen arrested by the 
municipal authorities. Frequently they were handed over to 
boatmen: in Frankfort, in 1399, seamen were instructed to rid 
the city of a madman who walked about the streets naked; in the 
first years of the fifteenth century, a criminal madman was 
expelled in the same manner from Mainz. Sometimes the sailors 
disembarked these bothersome passengers sooner than they had 
promised; witness a blacksmith of Frankfort twice expelled and 
twice returning before being taken to Kreuznach for good. Often 
the cities of Europe must have seen these “ships of fools” 
approaching their harbors. 

It is not easy to discover the exact meaning of this custom. 
One might suppose it was a general means of extradition by 
which municipalities sent wandering madmen out of their own 
jurisdiction; a hypothesis which will not in itself account for the 
facts, since certain madmen, even before special houses were 
