

280 


becomes almost obligatory for the confinement of madmen. But 
within the asylum itself, the doctor takes a preponderant place, 
insofar as he converts it into a medical space. However, and this 
is the essential point, the doctor s intervention is not made by 
virtue of a medical skill or power that he possesses in himself and 
that would be justified by a body of objective knowledge. It is not 
as a scientist that homo medicus has authority in the asylum, but 
as a wise man. If the medical profession is required, it is as a 
juridical and moral guarantee, not in the name of science. A man 
of great probity, of utter virtue and scruple, who had had long 
experience in the asylum would do as well. For the medical 
enterprise is only a part of an enormous moral task that must be 
accomplished at the asylum, and which alone can ensure the cure 
of the insane: “Must it not be an inviolable law in the 
administration of any establishment for the insane, whether 
public or private, to grant the maniac all the liberty that the 
safety of his person and of that of others permits, and to 
proportion his repression to the greater or lesser seriousness of 
danger of his deviations ..., to gather all the facts that can serve 
to enlighten the physician in treatment, to study with care the 
particular varieties of behavior and temperament, and 
accordingly to use gentleness or firmness, conciliatory terms or 
the tone of authority and an inflexible severity?”! o According to 
Samuel Tuke, the first doctor appointed at the Retreat was 
recommended by his “indefatigable perseverance”; doubtless he 
had no particular knowledge of mental illnesses when he entered 
the asylum, but “he entered on his office with the anxiety and 
ardor of a feeling mind, upon the exertion of whose skill, 
depended the dearest interest of many of his fellow-creatures.” 
He tried the various remedies that his own common sense and 
the experience of his predecessors suggested. But he was soon 
disappointed, not because the results were bad, or that the 
number of cures was minimal: “Yet the medical means were so 


281 


imperfectly connected with the progress of recovery, that he 
could not avoid suspecting them, to be rather concomitants than 
causes.” He then realized that there was little to be done using 
the medical methods known up to that time. The concern for 
humanity prevailed within him, and he decided to use no 
medicament that would be too disagreeable to the patient. But it 
must not be thought that the doctor s role had little importance 
at the Retreat: by the visits he paid regularly to the patients, by 
the authority he exercised in the house over all the staff, “the 
physician ... sometimes possesses more influence over the 
patients’ minds, than the other attendants.” 

It is thought that Tuke and Pinel opened the asylum to 
medical knowledge. They did not introduce science, but a 
personality, whose powers borrowed from science only their 
disguise, or at most their justification. These powers, by their 
nature, were of a moral and social order; they took root in the 
madman’s minority status, in the insanity of his person, not of 
his mind. If the medical personage could isolate madness, it was 
not because he knew it, but because he mastered it; and what for 
positivism would be an image of objectivity was only the other 
side of this domination. “It is a very important object to win the 
confidence of these sufferers, and to arouse in them feelings of 
respect and obedience, which can only be the fruit of superior 
discernment, distinguished education, and dignity of tone and 
manner. Stupidity, ignorance, and the lack of principles, 
sustained by a tyrannical harshness, may incite fear, but always 
inspire distrust. The keeper of madmen who has obtained 
domination over them directs and rules their conduct as he 
pleases; he must be endowed with a firm character, and on 
occasion display an imposing strength. He must threaten little 
but carry out his threats, and if he is disobeyed, punishment must 
immediately ensue. ”19 The physician could exercise his absolute 
authority in the world of the asylum only insofar as, from the 


282 


beginning, he was Father and Judge, Family and Law—his 
medical practice being for a long time no more than a 
complement to the old rites of Order, Authority, and 
Punishment. And Pinel was well aware that the doctor cures 
when, exclusive of modern therapeutics, he brings into play these 
immemorial figures. 

Pinel cites the case of a girl of seventeen who had been raised 
by her parents with “extreme indulgence”; she had fallen into a 
“giddy, mad delirium without any cause that could be 
determined”; at the hospital she was treated with great 
gentleness, but she always showed a certain “haughtiness” which 
could not be tolerated at the asylum; she spoke “of her parents 
with nothing but bitterness.” It was decided to subject her to a 
regime of strict authority; “the keeper, in order to tame this 
inflexible character, seized the moment of the bath and expressed 
himself forcibly concerning certain unnatural persons who dared 
oppose their parents and disdain their authority. He warned the 
