despite analogies of form, despite the rigor of its meaning, it was 
not a discourse of reason. It spoke, but in the night of blindness; 
it was more than the loose and disordered text of a dream, since 
it deceived itself; but it was more than an erroneous proposition, 
since it was plunged into that total obscurity which is that of 
sleep. Delirium, as the principle of madness, is a system of false 
propositions in the general syntax of the dream. 

Madness is precisely at the point of contact between the 
oneiric and the erroneous; it traverses, in its variations, the 
surface on which they meet, the surface which both joins and 
separates them. With error, madness shares non-truth, and 
arbitrariness in affirmation or negation; from the dream, 
madness borrows the flow of images and the colorful presence of 
hallucinations. But while error is merely non-truth, while the 
dream neither affirms nor judges, madness fills the void of error 
with images, and links hallucinations by affirmation of the false. 
In a sense, it is thus plenitude, joining to the figures of night the 
powers of day, to the forms of fantasy the activity of the waking 
mind; it links the dark content with the forms of light. But is not 
such plenitude actually the culmination of the void? The presence 
of images offers no more than night-ringed hallucinations, 
figures inscribed at the corners of sleep, hence detached from any 
sensuous reality; however vivid they are, however rigorously 
established in the body, these images are nothingness, since they 
represent nothing; as for erroneous judgment, it judges only in 


116 


appearance: affirming nothing true or real, it does not affirm at 
all; it is ensnared in the non-being of error. 

Joining vision and blindness, image and judgment, 
hallucination and language, sleep and waking, day and night, 
madness is ultimately nothing, for it unites in them all that is 
negative. But the paradox of this nothing is to manifest itself, to 
explode in signs, in words, in gestures. Inextricable unity of order 
and disorder, of the reasonable being of things and this 
nothingness of madness! For madness, if it is nothing, can 
manifest itself only by departing from itself, by assuming an 
appearance in the order of reason and thus becoming the 
contrary of itself. Which illuminates the paradoxes of the 
classical experience: madness is always absent, in a perpetual 
retreat where it is inaccessible, without phenomenal or positive 
character; and yet it is present and perfectly visible in the singular 
evidence of the madman. Meaningless disorder as madness is, it 
reveals, when we examine it, only ordered classifications, 
rigorous mechanisms in soul and body, language articulated 
