This structure proper to the monarchical and bourgeois order 
of France, contemporary with its organization in absolutist 
forms, soon extended its network over the whole of France. An 
edict of the King, dated June 16, 1676, prescribed the 
establishment of an “hopital general in each city of his kingdom.” 
Occasionally the measure had been anticipated by the local 
authorities; the bourgeoisie of Fyons had already organized in 
1612 a charity establishment that functioned in an analogous 
manner. The Archbishop of Tours was proud to declare on July 
10, 1676, that his “archepiscopal city has happily foreseen the 
pious intentions of the King and erected an hopital general called 
Fa Charite even before the one in Paris, whose order has served 
as a model for all those subsequently established, within or 
outside the kingdom.” The Charite of Tours, in fact, had been 
founded in 1656, and the King had endowed it with an income 
of four thousand livres. Over the entire face of France, hopitaux 
generaux were opened; on the eve of the Revolution, they were to 
be found in thirty-two provincial cities. 

Even if it had been deliberately excluded from the 
organization of the hopitaux generaux —by complicity, doubtless, 
between royal power and bourgeoisie—the Church nonetheless 
did not remain a stranger to the movement. It reformed its own 
hospital institutions, redistributed the wealth of its foundations, 


53 



even created congregations whose purposes were rather 
analogous to those of the Hopital General. Vincent de Paul 
reorganized Saint-Lazare, the most important of the former lazar 
houses of Paris; on January 7, 1632, he signed a contract in the 
name of the Congregationists of the Mission with the “Priory” of 
Saint-Lazare, which was now to receive “persons detained by 
order of His Majesty.” The Order of Good Sons opened 
hospitals of this nature in the north of France. The Brothers of 
Saint John of God, called into France in 1602, founded first the 
Charite of Paris in the Faubourg Saint-Germain, then 
Charenton, into which they moved on May 10, 1645. Not far 
from Paris, they also operated the Charite of Senlis, which 
opened on October 27, 1670. Some years before, the Duchess of 
Bouillon had donated them the buildings and benefices of La 
Maladrerie, founded in the fourteenth century by Thibaut de 
Champagne, at Chateau-Thierry. They administered also the 
Charites of Saint-Yon, Pontorson, Cadillac, and Romans. In 
1699, the Lazarists founded in Marseilles the establishment that 
was to become the Hopital Saint-Pierre. Then, in the eighteenth 
century, came Armentieres (1712), Mareville (1714), the Good 
Savior of Caen (1735); Saint-Meins of Rennes opened shortly 
before the Revolution (1780). 

The phenomenon has European dimensions. The constitution 
of an absolute monarchy and the intense Catholic renaissance 
during the Counter-Reformation produced in France a very 
particular character of simultaneous competition and complicity 
between the government and the Church. Elsewhere it assumed 
quite different forms; but its localization in time was just as 
precise. The great hospitals, houses of confinement, 
establishments of religion and public order, of assistance and 
punishment, of governmental charity and welfare measures, are a 
phenomenon of the classical period: as universal as itself and 
almost contemporary with its birth. In German-speaking 
countries, it was marked by the creation of houses of correction, 


54 



the Zucht-hausern\ the first antedates the French houses of 
confinement (except for the Charite of Lyons); it opened in 
Hamburg around 1620. The others were founded in the second 
half of the century: Basel (1667), Breslau (1668), Frankfort 
(1684), Spandau (1684), Konigsberg (1691). They continued to 
multiply in the eighteenth century; Leipzig first in 1701, then 
Halle and Cassel in 1717 and 1720, later Brieg and Osnabriick 
(1756), and finally Torgau in 1771. 

In England the origins of confinement are more remote. An 
act of 1575 covering both “the punishment of vagabonds and the 
relief of the poor” prescribed the construction of houses oj 
correction , to number at least one per county. Their upkeep was 
to be assured by a tax, but the public was encouraged to make 
voluntary donations. It appears, however, that in this form the 
measure was scarcely ever applied, since, some years later, it was 
decided to authorize private enterprise: it was no longer 
necessary to obtain an official permit to open a hospital or a 
house of correction; anyone who pleased might do so. At the 
beginning of the seventeenth century, a general reorganization: a 
fine of five pounds was imposed on any justice of the peace who 
had not established one in the area of his jurisdiction; the houses 
were to install trades, workshops, and factories (milling, 
spinning, weaving) to aid in their upkeep and assure their 
inmates of work; a judge was to decide who was qualified to be 
sent there. The development of these “bridewells” was not too 
considerable; often they were gradually absorbed by the prisons 
to which they were attached; the practice never spread as far as 
Scotland. On the other hand, the workhouses were destined to 
