population had to be reassured and Bicetre cleared of its guilt: 
“The rumors that have begun to spread concerning a contagious 
illness at Bicetre that is capable of infecting the capital are 
without foundation.” Evidently the report did not check the 
rumors completely, since some time later the physician of the 
Hopital General issued another in which he made the same 
statement; he was forced to acknowledge the poor sanitary 
conditions of Bicetre, but “matters have not, for all that, reached 
the cruel extremity of converting the refuge of these unfortunates 
into another source of inevitable evils much more lamentable 
than those which require a remedy as prompt as it is efficacious.” 

The circle was closed: all those forms of unreason which had 
replaced leprosy in the geography of evil, and which had been 
banished into the remotest social distance, now became a visible 
leprosy and offered their running sores to the promiscuity of 
men. Unreason was once more present; but marked now by an 
imaginary stigma of disease, which added its powers of terror. 

Thus it is in the realm of the fantastic and not within the rigor 
of medical thought that unreason joins illness and draws closer to 
it. Long before the problem of discovering to what degree the 
unreasonable is pathological was formulated, there had formed, 
in the space of confinement and by an alchemy peculiar to it, a 
melange combining the dread of unreason and the old specters of 
disease. From a great distance, the old confusions about leprosy 
functioned once again; and it is the vigor of these fantastic 
themes which was the first agent of synthesis between the world 


216 



of unreason and the medical universe. They first communicated 
through the hallucinations of fear, combining the infernal 
mixtures of “corruption” and “taint.” It is important, perhaps 
decisive for the place madness was to occupy in modern culture, 
that homo medicus was not called into the world of confinement 
as an arbiter , to divide what was crime from what was madness, 
what was evil from what was illness, but rather as a guardian, to 
protect others from the vague danger that exuded through the 
walls of confinement. It is easy to suppose that a free and 
generous sympathy awakened interest in the fate of the confined, 
and that a more diligent and informed medical attention could 
recognize disease where previously the authorities had 
indiscriminately punished transgressions. As it happened, the 
atmosphere was not one of such benevolent neutrality. If a 
doctor was summoned, if he was asked to observe, it was because 
people were afraid—afraid of the strange chemistry that seethed 
behind the walls of confinement, afraid of the powers forming 
there that threatened to propagate. The doctor came, once the 
conversion of images was effected, the disease having already 
assumed the ambiguous aspects of fermentation, of corruption, 
of tainted exhalations, of decomposed flesh. What is traditionally 
called “progress” toward madness’s attaining a medical status was 
in fact made possible only by a strange regression. In the 
inextricable mixture of moral and physical contagions,6 and by 
virtue of that symbolism of Impurity so familiar to the 
eighteenth century, very early images rose again to the surface of 
human memory. And it was as a result of this reactivation of 
images, more than by an improvement of knowledge, that 
unreason was eventually confronted by medical thought. 
Paradoxically, in the return to that fantastic life which mingles 
with the contemporary images of illness, positivism would gain a 
hold over unreason, or rather would discover a new reason for 
protecting itself against it. 


217 


The question, for the moment, was not to suppress the houses 
of confinement, but to neutralize them as potential causes of a 
new evil. The problem was to organize them while purifying 
them. The great reform movement that developed in the second 
half of the eighteenth century originated in the effort to reduce 
contamination by destroying impurities and vapors, abating 
fermentations, preventing evil and disease from tainting the air 
and spreading their contagion in the atmosphere of the cities. 
The hospital, the house of correction, all the places of 
confinement, were to be more completely isolated, surrounded 
by a purer air: this period produced a whole literature concerning 
the airing of hospitals, which tentatively approaches the medical 
problem of contagion, but aims more specifically at themes of 
moral communication. In 1776 a decree of the Council of State 
appointed a commission to determine “the degree of 
amelioration of which the various hospitals in France are in 
need.” Viel was instructed to rebuild the wards of La Salpetriere. 
The ideal was an asylum which, while preserving its essential 
functions, would be so organized that the evil could vegetate 
there without ever spreading; an asylum where unreason would 
be entirely contained and offered as a spectacle, without 
threatening the spectators; where it would have all the powers of 
example and none of the risks of contagion. In short, an asylum 
restored to its truth as a cage. It is this “sterilized” confinement, 
if we may employ an anachronistic term, that was still, in 1789, 
the dream of the Abbe Desmonceaux, in a little work dedicated 
to National Benevolence ; he planned to create a pedagogical 
instrument—a spectacle conclusively proving the drawbacks of 
