transgression in life, by a virtue proper to life in the asylum, 
becomes a social crime, observed, condemned, and punished; a 
trial which has no outcome but in a perpetual recommencement 
in the internalized form of remorse. The madmen “delivered” by 
Pinel and, after him, the madmen of modern confinement are 
under arraignment; if they have the privilege of no longer being 
associated or identified with convicts, they are condemned, at 
every moment, to be subject to an accusation whose text is never 
given, for it is their entire life in the asylum which constitutes it. 


279 



The asylum of the age of positivism, which it is Pinel’s glory to 
have founded, is not a free realm of observation, diagnosis, and 
therapeutics; it is a juridical space where one is accused, judged, 
and condemned, and from which one is never released except by 
the version of this trial in psychological depth—that is, by 
remorse. Madness will be punished in the asylum, even if it is 
innocent outside of it. For a long time to come, and until our 
own day at least, it is imprisoned in a moral world. 

To silence, to recognition in the mirror, to perpetual 
judgment, we must add a fourth structure peculiar to the world 
of the asylum as it was constituted at the end of the eighteenth 
century: this is the apotheosis of the medical personage. Of them 
all, it is doubtless the most important, since it would authorize 
not only new contacts between doctor and patient, but a new 
relation between insanity and medical thought, and ultimately 
command the whole modern experience of madness. Hitherto, 
we find in the asylums only the same structures of confinement, 
but displaced and deformed. With the new status of the medical 
personage, the deepest meaning of confinement is abolished: 
mental disease, with the meanings we now give it, is made 
possible. 

The work of Tuke and of Pinel, whose spirit and values are so 
different, meet in this transformation of the medical personage. 
The physician, as we have seen, played no part in the life of 
confinement. Now he becomes the essential figure of the asylum. 
He is in charge of entry. The ruling at the Retreat is precise: “On 
the admission of patients, the committee should, in general, 
require a certificate signed by a medical person.... It should also 
be stated whether the patient is afflicted with any complaint 
independent of insanity. It is also desirable that some account 
should be sent, how long the patient has been disordered; 
whether any, or what sort of medical means have been used. ”17 
From the end of the eighteenth century, the medical certificate 
