“starting over,” and the first step toward what will turn out to be 
the reconciliation with reason and truth. It marks the point 
toward which converge, apparently, the tragic destinies of the 
characters, and from which, in reality, emerge the lines leading 
to happiness regained. In madness equilibrium is established, but 
it masks that equilibrium beneath the cloud of illusion, beneath 
feigned disorder; the rigor of the architecture is concealed 
beneath the cunning arrangement of these disordered violences. 
The sudden bursts of life, the random gestures and words, the 
wind of madness that suddenly breaks lines, shatters attitudes, 
rumples draperies—while the strings are merely being pulled 
tighter—this is the very type of baroque trompe-Foeil. Madness is 
the great trompe-Foeil in the tragicomic structures of preclassical 


44 



literature. 

This was understood by Georges de Scudery, who made his 
Comedie des comediens a theater of theater, situating his play, from 
the start, in the interacting illusions of madness. One group of 
actors takes the part of spectators, another that of actors. The 
former must pretend to take the decor for reality, the play for 
life, while in reality these actors are performing in a real decor; 
on the other hand, the latter must pretend to play the part of 
actors, while in fact, quite simply, they are actors acting. A 
double impersonation in which each element is doubled, thus 
forming that renewed exchange of the real and the illusory which 
is itself the dramatic meaning of madness. “I do not know,” 
Mondory says in the prologue to Scudery’s play, “what 
extravagance has today come over my companions, but it is so 
great that I am forced to believe that some spell has robbed them 
of their reason, and the worst of it is that they are trying to make 
me lose mine, and you yours as well. They wish to persuade me 
that I am not on a stage, that this is the city of Lyons, that over 
there is an inn, and there an innyard where actors who are not 
ourselves, yet who are, are performing a Pastoral.” In this 
extravaganza, the theater develops its truth, which is illusion. 
Which is, in the strict sense, madness. 

The classical experience of madness is born. The great threat 
that dawned on the horizon of the fifteenth century subsides, the 
disturbing powers that inhabit Bosch’s painting have lost their 
violence. Forms remain, now transparent and docile, forming a 
cortege, the inevitable procession of reason. Madness has ceased 
to be—at the limits of the world, of man and death—an 
eschatological figure; the darkness has dispersed on which the 
eyes of madness were fixed and out of which the forms of the 
impossible were born. Oblivion falls upon the world navigated by 
the free slaves of the Ship of Fools. Madness will no longer 
proceed from a point within the world to a point beyond, on its 


45 



strange voyage; it will never again be that fugitive and absolute 
limit. Behold it moored now, made fast among things and men. 
Retained and maintained. No longer a ship but a hospital. 

Scarcely a century after the career of the mad ships, we note 
the appearance of the theme of the “Hospital of Madmen,” the 
“Madhouse.” Here every empty head, fixed and classified 
according to the true reason of men, utters contradiction and 
irony, the double language of Wisdom: "... the Hospital of 
incurable Madmen, where are recited from end to end all the 
follies and fevers of the mind, by men as well as women, a task 
no less useful than enjoyable, and necessary for the acquisition of 
true wisdom.”10 Here each form of madness finds its proper 
place, its distinguishing mark, and its tutelary divinity: frenzied 
and ranting madness, symbolized by a fool astride a chair, 
struggles beneath Minerva’s gaze; the somber melancholics that 
roam the countryside, solitary and avid wolves, have as their god 
Jupiter, patron of animal metamorphoses; then come the “mad 
drunkards,” the “madmen deprived of memory and 
understanding,” the “madmen benumbed and half-dead,” the 
“madmen of giddy and empty heads” ... All this world of 
disorder, in perfect order, pronounces, each in his turn, the 
Praise of Reason. Already, in this “Hospital,” confinement has 
succeeded embarkation. 

Tamed, madness preserves all the appearances of its reign. It 
now takes part in the measures of reason and in the labor of 
truth. It plays on the surface of things and in the glitter of 
daylight, over all the workings of appearances, over the 
ambiguity of reality and illusion, over all that indeterminate web, 
ever rewoven and broken, which both unites and separates truth 
and appearance. It hides and manifests, it utters truth and 
falsehood, it is light and shadow. It shimmers, a central and 
indulgent figure, already precarious in this baroque age. 

Let us not be surprised to come upon it so often in the fictions 


46 

