
this shocking mixture of frivolous girls with hardened women 
who can teach them only the art of the most unbridled 
corruption.” For a long time these visions would prowl insistently 
through the nights of the eighteenth century. For a moment they 
would be picked out by the pitiless light of Sade’s work and 
placed by it in the rigorous geometry of Desire. They would be 
taken up again and wrapped in the murky light of Goya’s 
Madhouse , or the twilight that surrounds the Quinta del Sordo. 
How closely the faces of the Disparates resemble them! A whole 
imaginary landscape reappears, conveyed by the Great Fear 
confinement now inspires. 

What the classical period had confined was not only an 
abstract unreason which mingled madmen and libertines, 
invalids, and criminals, but also an enormous reservoir of the 
fantastic, a dormant world of monsters supposedly engulfed in 
the darkness of Hieronymus Bosch which had once spewed them 
forth. One might say that the fortresses of confinement added to 
their social role of segregation and purification a quite opposite 
cultural function. Even as they separated reason from unreason 
on society’s surface, they preserved in depth the images where 
they mingled and exchanged properties. The fortresses of 
confinement functioned as a great, long silent memory; they 
maintained in the shadows an iconographic power that men 
might have thought was exorcised; created by the new classical 
order, they preserved, against it and against time, forbidden 
figures that could thus be transmitted intact from the sixteenth 
to the nineteenth century. In this abolished time, the Brocken 
joined Dulle Griet in the same imaginary landscape, and 
Noirceuil, the great legend of the Marechal de Rais. 
Confinement allowed, indeed called for, this resistance of 
imagery. 

But the images liberated at the end of the eighteenth century 
were not identical at all points with those the seventeenth 
century had tried to eliminate. Something had happened, in the 


220 



darkness, which detached them from that secret world where the 
Renaissance, after the Middle Ages, had found them; they had 
lodged in the hearts, in the desires, in the imaginations of men; 
and instead of manifesting to sight the abrupt presence of the 
insane, they seethed as the strange contradiction of human 
appetites: the complicity of desire and murder, of cruelty and the 
longing to suffer, of sovereignty and slavery, of insult and 
