40 


mind, those of the heart. But it has still other powers: the 
punishment it inflicts multiplies by nature insofar as, by 
punishing itself, it unveils the truth. The justification of this 
madness is that it is truthful. Truthful since the sufferer already 
experiences, in the vain whirlwind of his hallucinations, what will 
for all eternity be the pain of his punishment: Eraste, in 
Corneille’s Melite , sees himself already pursued by the 
Eumenides and condemned by Minos. Truthful, too, because the 
crime hidden from all eyes dawns like day in the night of this 
strange punishment; madness, in its wild, untamable words, 
proclaims its own meaning; in its chimeras, it utters its secret 
truth; its cries speak for its conscience. Thus Lady Macbeth’s 
delirium reveals to those who “have known what they should 
not” words long uttered only to “dead pillows.” 

Then the last type of madness: that of desperate passion. Love 
disappointed in its excess, and especially love deceived by the 
fatality of death, has no other recourse but madness. As long as 
there was an object, mad love was more love than madness; left 
to itself, it pursues itself in the void of delirium. Punishment of a 
passion too abjectly abandoned to its violence? No doubt; but 
this punishment is also a relief; it spreads, over the irreparable 
absence, the mercy of imaginary presences; it recovers, in the 
paradox of innocent joy or in the heroism of senseless pursuits, 
the vanished form. If it leads to death, it is a death in which the 
lovers will never be separated again. This is Ophelia’s last song, 
this is the delirium of Ariste in La Folie du sage. But above all, 
this is the bitter and sweet madness of King Lear. 

In Shakespeare, madness is allied to death and murder; in 
Cervantes, images are controlled by the presumption and the 
complacencies of the imaginary. These are supreme models 
whose imitators deflect and disarm them. Doubtless, both testify 
more to a tragic experience of madness appearing in the fifteenth 
century, than to a critical and moral experience of Unreason 
developing in their own epoch. Outside of time, they establish a 


41 



link with a meaning about to be lost, and whose continuity will 
no longer survive except in darkness. But it is by comparing their 
work, and what it maintains, with the meanings that develop 
among their contemporaries or imitators, that we may decipher 
what is happening, at the beginning of the seventeenth century, 
