morbis convulsivis and hypochondria in the section of De anima 
brutorum which dealt with diseases of the head, giving it the 
name of passio colica? Here it is certainly a question of two quite 
different diseases: in one case, the overheated spirits are subject 
to a reciprocal pressure which may give the impression that they 
are exploding—provoking those irregular or preternatural 
movements whose insane aspect constitutes hysterical 
convulsions. On the contrary, in passio colica , the spirits are 


147 



irritated because of a matter that is hostile and inappropriate to 
them ( infest a et improportionnata) ; they then provoke 
disturbances, irritations, corrugationes in the sensitive fibers. 
Willis therefore advises us not to be surprised by certain 
analogies of symptoms: certainly, we have seen convulsions 
produce pains as if the violent movement of hysteria could 
provoke the sufferings of hypochondria. But the resemblances 
are deceptive. “The substance is not the same, but a little 
different.” 

But beneath these fixed distinctions of the nosographers, a 
slow labor was being performed which tended increasingly to 
identify hysteria and hypochondria, as two forms of one and the 
same disease. In 1725 Richard Blackmore published a Treatise oj 
the Spleen and Vapours , or Hypochondriacal and Hysterical 
Affections', in it the two illnesses were defined as two varieties of a 
single affection—either a “morbific constitution of the spirits” or 
a “disposition to leave their reservoirs and to consume 
themselves.” For Whytt, in the middle of the eighteenth century, 
the identification was complete; the system of symptoms is 
henceforth identical: “An extraordinary sensation of cold and 
heat, of pains in several parts of the body; syncopes and vaporous 
convulsions; catalepsy and tetanus; gas in the stomach and 
intestines; an insatiable appetite for food; vomiting of black 
matter; a sudden and abundant flow of clear, pale urine; marasma 
or nervous atrophy; nervous cough; palpitations of the heart; 
variations in the pulse; periodic headaches; vertigo and dizzy 
spells; diminution and failure of eyesight; depression, despair, 
melancholia or even madness; nightmares or incubi.” 

Moreover, during the classical period hysteria and 
hypochondria slowly joined the domain of mental diseases. 
Richard Mead could still write apropos of hypochondria: “It is an 
illness of the whole body.” And we must restore its true value to 
Willis’s text on hysteria: “Among the diseases of women, 
hysterical affection is of such bad repute that like the semi- 
