or profit. 

It was in a certain experience of labor that the indissociably 
economic and moral demand for confinement was formulated. 
Between labor and idleness in the classical world ran a line of 
demarcation that replaced the exclusion of leprosy. The asylum 
was substituted for the lazar house, in the geography of haunted 
places as in the landscape of the moral universe. The old rites of 
excommunication were revived, but in the world of production 
and commerce. It was in these places of doomed and despised 
idleness, in this space invented by a society which had derived an 
ethical transcendence from the law of work, that madness would 
appear and soon expand until it had annexed them. A day was to 
come when it could possess these sterile reaches of idleness by a 
sort of very old and very dim right of inheritance. The 
nineteenth century would consent, would even insist that to the 
mad and to them alone be transferred these lands on which, a 
hundred and fifty years before, men had sought to pen the poor, 
the vagabond, the unemployed. 

It is not immaterial that madmen were included in the 
proscription of idleness. From its origin, they would have their 
place beside the poor, deserving or not, and the idle, voluntary or 
not. Like them, they would be subject to the rules of forced 
labor. More than once, in fact, they figured in their singular 
fashion within this uniform constraint. In the workshops in 
which they were interned, they distinguished themselves by their 
inability to work and to follow the rhythms of collective life. The 
necessity, discovered in the eighteenth century, to provide a 
special regime for the insane, and the great crisis of confinement 
that shortly preceded the Revolution, are linked to the experience 
of madness available in the universal necessity of labor. Men did 
not wait until the seventeenth century to “shut up” the mad, but 


68 



it was in this period that they began to “confine” or “intern” 
them, along with an entire population with whom their kinship 
was recognized. Until the Renaissance, the sensibility to madness 
was linked to the presence of imaginary transcendences. In the 
classical age, for the first time, madness was perceived through a 
condemnation of idleness and in a social immanence guaranteed 
by the community of labor. This community acquired an ethical 
power of segregation, which permitted it to eject, as into another 
world, all forms of social uselessness. It was in this other world , 
encircled by the sacred powers of labor, that madness would 
assume the status we now attribute to it. If there is, in classical 
madness, something which refers elsewhere, and to other things , 
it is no longer because the madman comes from the world of the 
irrational and bears its stigmata; rather, it is because he crosses 
the frontiers of bourgeois order of his own accord, and alienates 
himself outside the sacred limits of its ethic. 

In fact, the relation between the practice of confinement and 
the insistence on work is not defined by economic conditions; far 
from it. A moral perception sustains and animates it. When the 
Board of Trade published its report on the poor in which it 
proposed the means “to render them useful to the public,” it was 
made quite clear that the origin of poverty was neither scarcity of 
commodities nor unemployment, but “the weakening of 
discipline and the relaxation of morals.” The edict of 1657, too, 
was full of moral denunciations and strange threats. “The 
libertinage of beggars has risen to excess because of an 
unfortunate tolerance of crimes of all sorts, which attract the 
curse of God upon the State when they remain unpunished.” 
This “libertinage” is not the kind that can be defined in relation 
to the great law of work, but a moral libertinage: “Experience 
having taught those persons who are employed in charitable 
occupations that many among them of either sex live together 
without marriage, that many of their children are unbaptized, 
and that almost all of them live in ignorance of religion, 


69 



disdaining the sacraments, and continually practicing all sorts of 
vice.” Hence the Hopital does not have the appearance of a mere 
refuge for those whom age, infirmity, or sickness keep from 
working; it will have not only the aspect of a forced labor camp, 
but also that of a moral institution responsible for punishing, for 
correcting a certain moral “abeyance” which does not merit the 
tribunal of men, but cannot be corrected by the severity of 
penance alone. The Hopital General has an ethical status. It is 
this moral charge which invests its directors, and they are 
granted every judicial apparatus and means of repression: “They 
have power of authority, of direction, of administration, of 
commerce, of police, of jurisdiction, of correction and 
punishment”; and to accomplish this task “stakes, irons, prisons, 
and dungeons”8 are put at their disposal. 

And it is in this context that the obligation to work assumes 
its meaning as both ethical exercise and moral guarantee. It will 
serve as askesis , as punishment, as symptom of a certain 
disposition of the heart. The prisoner who could and who would 
work would be released, not so much because he was again useful 
