essential not to transgress it. On one side, tragedy. The rule of 
the theatrical day has a positive content; it forces tragic duration 
to be poised upon the singular but universal alternation of day 


119 



and night; the whole of the tragedy must be accomplished in this 
unity of time, for tragedy is ultimately nothing but the 
confrontation of two realms, linked to each other by time itself, 
in the irreconcilable. Every day, in Racine’s theater, is overhung 
by a night, which it brings, so to speak, to light: the night of 
Troy and its massacres, the night of Nero’s desires, Titus’s 
Roman night, Athalie’s night. These are the great stretches of 
night, realms of darkness which haunt the day without yielding 
an hour, and disappear only in the new night of death. And these 
fantastic nights, in their turn, are haunted by a light which forms 
a kind of infernal reflection of the day: the burning of Troy, the 
torches of the Praetorians, the pale light of the dream. In 
classical tragedy, day and night are arranged like a pair of 
mirrors, endlessly reflect each other, and afford that simple 
couple a sudden profundity which envelops in a single movement 
all of man’s life and his death. In the same fashion, in De la 
Tour’s Madeleine au miroir , light and shadow confront each other 
divide and at the same time unite a face and its reflection, a skull 
and its image, a vigil and a silence; and in the Image Saint-Alexis , 
the page holding the torch reveals under the shadow of the vault 
the man who was his master—a grave and luminous boy 
encounters all of human misery; a child brings death to light. 

On the other side, facing tragedy and its hieratic language, is 
the confused murmur of madness. Here, too, the great law of the 
division has been violated; shadow and light mingle in the fury of 
madness, as in the tragic disorder. But in another mode. In 
night, the tragic character found a somber truth of day; the night 
of Troy remained Andromache’s truth, as Athalie’s night 
presaged the truth of the already advancing day; night, 
paradoxically, revealed ; it was the profoundest day of being. The 
madman, conversely, finds in daylight only the inconsistency of 
the night’s figures; he lets the light be darkened by all the 
illusions of the dream; his day is only the most superficial night oj 
appearance. It is to this degree that tragic man, more than any 


120 



other, is engaged in being, is the bearer of his truth, since, like 
Phedre, he flings in the face of the pitiless sun all the secrets of 
the night; while the madman is entirely excluded from being. 
And how could he not be, lending as he does the day s illusory 
reflection to the night’s non-being? 

We understand that the tragic hero—in contrast to the 
baroque character of the preceding period—can never be mad; 
and that conversely madness cannot bear within itself those 
values of tragedy, which we have known since Nietzsche and 
Artaud. In the classical period, the man of tragedy and the man 
of madness confront each other, without a possible dialogue, 
without a common language; for the former can utter only the 
decisive words of being, uniting in a flash the truth of light and 
the depth of darkness; the latter endlessly drones out the 
indifferent murmur which cancels out both the day’s chatter and 
the lying dark. 

Madness designates the equinox between the vanity of night’s 
hallucinations and the non-being of light’s judgments. 

And this much, which the archaeology of knowledge has been 
able to teach us bit by bit, was already offered to us in a simple 
tragic fulguration, in the last words of Andromaque. 

As if, at the moment when madness was vanishing from the 
tragic act, at the moment when tragic man was to separate 
himself for over two centuries from the man of unreason—as if, 
at this very moment, an ultimate figuration were demanded of 
madness. The curtain which falls on the last scene of 
Andromaque also falls on the last of the great tragic incarnations 
of madness. But in this presence on the threshold of its own 
disappearance, in this madness incarcerating itself for good, is 
articulated what it is and will be for the entire classical age. Is it 
not precisely at the moment of its disappearance that it can best 
present its truth, its truth of absence, its truth which is that of 
day at the limits of night? This had to be the last scene of the 


121 



first great classical tragedy; or if one prefers, the first time in 
which the classical truth of madness is expressed in a tragic 
movement which is the last of the preclassical theater. A truth, in 
any case, that is instantaneous, since its appearance can only be 
its disappearance; the lightning-flash is seen only in the already 
advancing night. 

