

delirious language, we can conclude: 

1. In madness , for the classical age> there exist two forms oj 
delirium. A special, symptomatic form, proper to some of the 
diseases of the mind and especially to melancholia; in this sense 
we can say that there are diseases with or without delirium. In 
any case, such delirium is always manifest; it forms an integral 
part of the signs of madness; it is immanent to madness’s truth 
and constitutes only a sector of it. But there exists another 
delirium which is not always manifest, which is not formulated 
by the sufferer himself in the course of the disease, but which 
cannot fail to exist in the eyes of anyone who, seeking to trace 
the disease from its origins, attempts to formulate its riddle and 
its truth. 

2. This implicit delirium exists in all the alterations of the mind , 
even where we would expect it least. In cases of no more than 
silent gestures, wordless violence, oddities of conduct, classical 
thought has no doubt that madness is continually subjacent, 
relating each of these particular signs to the general essence of 
madness. James’s Dictionary expressly urges us to consider as 
delirious “the sufferers who sin by fault or excess in any of 
various voluntary actions, in a manner contrary to reason and to 
propriety; as when they use their hand, for example, to tear out 
tufts of wool or in an action similar to that which serves to catch 
flies; or when a patient acts against his custom and without 
cause, or when he speaks too much or too little against his 
normal habits; if he abounds in obscene remarks, being, when in 
health, of measured speech and decent in his discourse, and if he 
utters words that have no consequence, if he breathes more 
faintly than he must, or uncovers his private parts in the presence 
of those who are near him. We also regard as being in a state of 
delirium those whose minds are affected by some derangement 
in the organs of sense, or who use them in a fashion not 
customary to them, as when, for example, a sufferer is deprived 


109 



of some voluntary action or acts inhabitually.”14 

3. Thus understood , discourse covers the entire range of madness. 
Madness, in the classical sense, does not designate so much a 
specific change in the mind or in the body, as the existence, 
under the body’s alterations, under the oddity of conduct and 
conversation, of a delirious discourse. The simplest and most 
