awakening of madness would lose its original meaning and limit 
itself to being no more than recollection of moral law, return to 
the good, fidelity to the law. What Willis still intended as a 
reintroduction to truth would no longer be entirely understood 
by Sauvages, who speaks of lucidity in the recognition of the 
good: “Thus, one can recall to reason those whom false principles 
of moral philosophy have caused to lose their own, as long as 
they are willing to examine with us what is truly good, and what 
things are to be preferred to others.” Already it is no longer as 
awakener that the physician is to function, but as moralist. 
Against madness, Tissot considers that “a pure conscience, 
without reproach, is an excellent preservative.” And soon comes 
Pinel, for whom the awakening to truth no longer has a meaning 
in the cure, but only obedience and blind submission: “A 
fundamental principle for the cure of mania in a great number of 
cases is to resort first of all to an energetic repression, and to 
proceed subsequently to methods of benevolence.” 

2. Theatrical Representation. In appearance at least, this is a 
technique rigorously opposed to that of awakening. There, 
delirium, in all its immediate vivacity, was confronted by the 
patient work of reason. Either in the form of a slow pedagogy, or 
the form of an authoritarian invasion, reason was imposed, as if 
by the weight of its own being. The non-being of madness, the 
inanity of error, was forced to yield, finally, to this pressure of the 
truth. Here, the therapeutic operation functions entirely in the 
space of the imagination; we are dealing with a complicity of the 
unreal with itself; the imagination must play its own game, 
voluntarily propose new images, espouse delirium for delirium’s 
sake, and without opposition or confrontation, without even a 


197 


visible dialectic, must, paradoxically, cure. Health must lay siege 
to madness and conquer it in the very nothingness in which the 
disease is imprisoned. When the imagination “is sick, it can be 
cured only by the effect of a healthy and active imagination.... It 
is all one whether the invalid’s imagination is cured by fear, by a 
strong and painful impression upon the senses, or by an 
illusion.”! Illusion can cure the illusory—while reason alone can 
free from the unreasonable. What then is this dark power of the 
imaginary? 

Insofar as it is of the essence of the image to be taken for 
reality, it is reciprocally characteristic of reality that it can mime 
the image, pretend to the same substance, the same significance. 
Without a break, without a jolt, perception can continue the 
dream, fill in its gaps, confirm what is precarious about it, and 
lead it to its fulfillment. If illusion can appear as true as 
perception, perception in its turn can become the visible, 
unchallengeable truth of illusion. Such is the first step of the cure 
by “theatrical representation”: to integrate the unreality of the 
image into perceived truth, without the latter seeming to 
contradict or even contest the former. Thus Zacatus Lusitanus 
describes the cure of a melancholic who believed himself damned 
while still on earth because of the enormity of the sins he had 
committed. In the impossibility of convincing him by reasonable 
arguments that he could be saved, his physicians accepted his 
delirium and caused an “angel” dressed in white, with a sword in 
its hand, to appear to him, and after a severe exhortation this 
delusive vision announced that his sins had been remitted. 

From this very example, we see the next step: representation 
within the image is not enough; it is also necessary to continue the 
delirious discourse. For in the patient’s insane words there is a 
voice that speaks; it obeys its own grammar, it articulates a 
meaning. Grammar and meaning must be maintained in such a 
way that the representation of the hallucination in reality does 


198 


not seem like the transition from one register to another, like a 
translation into a new language, with an altered meaning. The 
same language must continue to make itself understood, merely 
bringing a new deductive element to the rigor of its discourse. 
Yet this element is not indifferent; the problem is not to pursue 
the delirium, but by continuing it to bring it to an end. It must 
be led to a state of paroxysm and crisis in which, without any 
addition of a foreign element, it is confronted by itself and forced 
to argue against the demands of its own truth. The real and 
perceptual discourse that prolongs the delirious language of the 
images must therefore, without escaping the latter’s laws, 
without departing from its sovereignty, exercise a positive 
function in relation to it; it tightens that language around its 
essential element; if it represents it at the risk of confirming it, it 
is in order to dramatize it. The case is cited of a sufferer who 
thought that he was dead, and was really dying from not eating; 
“a group of people who had made themselves pale and were 
dressed like the dead, entered his room, set up a table, brought 
food, and began to eat and drink before the bed. The starving 
‘dead man’ looked at them; they were astonished that he stayed 
in bed; they persuaded him that dead people eat at least as much 
as living ones. He readily accommodated himself to this idea.”18 
It is within a continuous discourse that the elements of delirium, 
coming into contradiction, bring on the crisis. A crisis which is, 
in a very ambiguous manner, both medical and theatrical; a 
