other, is engaged in being, is the bearer of his truth, since, like 
Phedre, he flings in the face of the pitiless sun all the secrets of 
the night; while the madman is entirely excluded from being. 
And how could he not be, lending as he does the day s illusory 
reflection to the night’s non-being? 

We understand that the tragic hero—in contrast to the 
baroque character of the preceding period—can never be mad; 
and that conversely madness cannot bear within itself those 
values of tragedy, which we have known since Nietzsche and 
Artaud. In the classical period, the man of tragedy and the man 
of madness confront each other, without a possible dialogue, 
without a common language; for the former can utter only the 
decisive words of being, uniting in a flash the truth of light and 
the depth of darkness; the latter endlessly drones out the 
indifferent murmur which cancels out both the day’s chatter and 
the lying dark. 

Madness designates the equinox between the vanity of night’s 
hallucinations and the non-being of light’s judgments. 

And this much, which the archaeology of knowledge has been 
able to teach us bit by bit, was already offered to us in a simple 
tragic fulguration, in the last words of Andromaque. 

As if, at the moment when madness was vanishing from the 
tragic act, at the moment when tragic man was to separate 
himself for over two centuries from the man of unreason—as if, 
at this very moment, an ultimate figuration were demanded of 
madness. The curtain which falls on the last scene of 
Andromaque also falls on the last of the great tragic incarnations 
of madness. But in this presence on the threshold of its own 
disappearance, in this madness incarcerating itself for good, is 
articulated what it is and will be for the entire classical age. Is it 
not precisely at the moment of its disappearance that it can best 
present its truth, its truth of absence, its truth which is that of 
day at the limits of night? This had to be the last scene of the 


121 



first great classical tragedy; or if one prefers, the first time in 
which the classical truth of madness is expressed in a tragic 
movement which is the last of the preclassical theater. A truth, in 
any case, that is instantaneous, since its appearance can only be 
its disappearance; the lightning-flash is seen only in the already 
advancing night. 

