built for them, were admitted to hospitals and cared for as such; 
at the Hotel-Dieu in Paris, their cots were set up in the 
dormitories. Moreover, in the majority of the cities of Europe 
there existed throughout the Middle Ages and the Renaissance a 
place of detention reserved for the insane; there was for example 
the Chatelet of Melun or the famous Tour aux Fous in Caen; 
there were the numberless Narrturmer of Germany, like the gates 
of Liibeck or the Jungpfer of Hamburg. Madmen were thus not 
invariably expelled. One might then speculate that among them 
only foreigners were driven away, each city agreeing to care for 
those madmen among its own citizens. Do we not in fact find 
among the account books of certain medieval cities subsidies for 
madmen or donations made for the care of the insane? However, 
the problem is not so simple, for there existed gathering places 
where the madmen, more numerous than elsewhere, were not 
autochthonous. First come the shrines: Saint-Mathurin de 
Larchant, Saint-Hildevert de Gournay, Besan^on, Gheel; 


20 



pilgrimages to these places were organized, often supported, by 
cities or hospitals. It is possible that these ships of fools, which 
haunted the imagination of the entire early Renaissance, were 
pilgrimage boats, highly symbolic cargoes of madmen in search 
of their reason: some went down the Rhineland rivers toward 
Belgium and Gheel; others sailed up the Rhine toward the Jura 
and Besan^on. 

But other cities, like Nuremberg, were certainly not shrines 
and yet contained great numbers of madmen-many more, in any 
case, than could have been furnished by the city itself. These 
madmen were housed and provided for in the city budget, and 
yet they were not given treatment; they were simply thrown into 
prison. We may suppose that in certain important cities—centers 
of travel and markets—madmen had been brought in 
considerable numbers by merchants and mariners and “lost” 
there, thus ridding their native cities of their presence. It may 
have happened that these places of “counterpilgrimage” have 
become confused with the places where, on the contrary, the 
insane were taken as pilgrims. Interest in cure and in exclusion 
coincide: madmen were confined in the holy locus of a miracle. 
It is possible that the village of Gheel developed in this manner 
—a shrine that became a ward, a holy land where madness hoped 
for deliverance, but where man enacted, according to old themes, 
a sort of ritual division. 

What matters is that the vagabond madmen, the act of driving 
them away, their departure and embarkation do not assume their 
entire significance on the plane of social utility or security. Other 
meanings much closer to rite are certainly present; and we can 
still discern some traces of them. Thus access to churches was 
denied to madmen, although ecclesiastical law did not deny them 
the use of the sacraments. The Church takes no action against a 
priest who goes mad; but in Nuremberg in 1421 a mad priest 
was expelled with particular solemnity, as if the impurity was 
multiplied by the sacred nature of his person, and the city put on 


21 



its budget the money given him as a viaticum. It happened that 
certain madmen were publicly whipped, and in the course of a 
kind of a game they were chased in a mock race and driven out 
of the city with quarterstaff blows. So many signs that the 
expulsion of madmen had become one of a number of ritual 
exiles. 

Thus we better understand the curious implication assigned to 
the navigation of madmen and the prestige attending it. On the 
one hand, we must not minimize its incontestable practical 
effectiveness: to hand a madman over to sailors was to be 
permanently sure he would not be prowling beneath the city 
walls; it made sure that he would go far away; it made him a 
prisoner of his own departure. But water adds to this the dark 
mass of its own values; it carries off, but it does more: it purifies. 
Navigation delivers man to the uncertainty of fate; on water, 
each of us is in the hands of his own destiny; every embarkation 
is, potentially, the last. It is for the other world that the madman 
sets sail in his fools’ boat; it is from the other world that he 
comes when he disembarks. The madman’s voyage is at once a 
rigorous division and an absolute Passage. In one sense, it simply 
develops, across a half-real, half-imaginary geography, the 
madman’s liminal position on the horizon of medieval concern— 
a position symbolized and made real at the same time by the 
madman’s privilege of being confined within the city gates', his 
exclusion must enclose him; if he cannot and must not have 
another prison than the threshold itself, he is kept at the point of 
passage. He is put in the interior of the exterior, and inversely. A 
highly symbolic position, which will doubtless remain his until 
our own day, if we are willing to admit that what was formerly a 
visible fortress of order has now become the castle of our 
conscience. 

Water and navigation certainly play this role. Confined on the 
ship, from which there is no escape, the madman is delivered to 
